Recall that after training the NMT system we freeze its parameters and use it only to generate features for the POS/morphology classifier.

Given a trained encoder ENC and a sentence s with POS/morphology annotation, we generate word features ENC i (s) for every word in the sentence.

We then train a classifier that uses the features ENC i (s) to predict POS or morphological tags.

So far we only looked at the encoder.

However, the decoder DEC is a crucial part in an MT system with access to both source and target sentences.

In order to examine what the decoder learns about morphology, we first train an NMT system on the parallel corpus.

Then, we use the trained model to encode a source sentence and extract features for words in the target sentence.

These features are used to train a classifier on POS or morphological tagging on the target side.5 Note that in this case the decoder is given the correct target words oneby-one, similar to the usual NMT training regime.

Table 3 (1st row) shows the results of using representations extracted with ENC and DEC from the Arabic-English and English-Arabic models, respectively.

There is clearly a huge drop in representation quality with the decoder.

6 At first, this drop seems correlated with lower BLEU scores in English to Arabic vs. Arabic to English.

However, we observed similar low POS tagging accuracy using decoder representations from high-quality NMT models.

For instance, the French-to-English system obtains 37.8 BLEU, but its decoder representations give a mere 54.26% accuracy on English POS tagging.

As an alternative explanation for the poor quality of the decoder representations, consider the fundamental tasks of the two NMT modules: encoder and decoder.

The encoder's task is to create a generic, close to language-independent representation of the source sentence, as shown by recent evidence from multilingual NMT (Johnson et al., 2016).

The decoder's task is to use this representation to generate the target sentence in a specific language.

Presumably, it is sufficient for the decoder to learn a strong language model in order to produce morphologically-correct output, without learning much about morphology, while the encoder needs to learn quite a lot about source language morphology in order to create a good generic representation.

In the following section we show that the attention mechanism also plays an important role in the division of labor between encoder and decoder.