The architecture of our MTL model for an essay of M traits is shown in Figure 2.

Here, the word embedding layer is shared across all the tasks.

In the multi-task learning framework, each stack is used to learn an essay representation for each essay trait.

In a similar manner, the essay representation for the overall score is learnt and it is concatenated with the predicted trait scores before being sent to a Dense layer with a sigmoid activation function to score the essay holistically.

For calculating each score -both overall and trait scores -we use the mean squared error loss function.

We experimented with multiple weights for the loss function for the essay trait scoring task, but settled on uniform weights for all the traits and the overall scoring task.

This is done because we want to get accurate predictions of the traits scores which are used for predicting the overall score.

We evaluate our experiments using five-fold cross validation.

We use the same data splits as used by Taghipour and Ng (2016).

To avoid overfitting, we choose the model which gives the best result on the validation set for evaluating on the test set, and we report the mean value of all 5 folds.

per essay set. * represents a statistically significant improvement using the MTL systems over the STL-LSTM system.

⋆ represents a statistically significant improvement of using the MTL-BiLSTM system over the MTL-LSTM system.

Most modern NLP systems have started to use attention-based transformer networks and large pretrained language models.

Yang et al. (2020), Cao et al. (2020), andUto et al. (2020) use the BERT-8 We have uploaded the rest of the requirements along with the code base-uncased (Devlin et al., 2019) pre-trained language model to perofrm automatic essay grading achieving QWKs in the range of 0.79 to 0.805.

However, BERT has about 110 million parameters (compared to our largest model with just under 2 million parameters).

Another limiting factor with using BERT is the fact that we can only input 512 tokens.

This is a problem, especially for Prompt 8, where the average essay length is about 650 words.

Mayfield and Black (2020) describe some of the other limitations of using BERT for scoring essays.