This study uses Dionisos (OpenFlow Suite, v. 2021.1, Update 4, BieicipFranlab, 2021) from IFP Energies nouvelles and Beicip-Franlab to synthesize a suite of emergent LIG coral reef terraces along the southwestern coast of Madagascar, at the Lembetabe site.

In order to test the sensitivity of the geological record to changing sea level conditions, we model three distinct relative sea level scenarios extracted from a coupled ANICE-SELEN model.

As with any model environment, certain limitations arise when transferring the physical environment into the virtual, often leading to an oversimplification of complex physical systems.

The model used in this study is not an exception.

Within the scope of this study, the primary interest is to evaluate shallow water reef evolution through glacial/interglacial cycles.

Dionisos solves sediment transport between cells using a diffusion equation (Granjeon et al., 1999).

As pointed out by Barrett and Webster (2017), this simplification works well for large-scale, basin-wide models but fails to capture the more nuanced hydrodynamics within shallow reef environments.

In order to address this without redesigning the entire Dionisos architecture, characterization of the nearshore wave environment allows for a reasonable approximation at our model grid resolution of 50 m × 50 m. The largest caveat however, is the method in which Dionisos solves for subaerial erosion.

This is partially addressed through the use of user-defined weathering rates for each sediment class.

However, in Lembetabe, modern active dune fields and fossilized aeolianites cover MIS 5e reefs, suggesting extensive offshore migration of dunes during glacial periods (e.g., Battistini, 1965;Boyden et al., 2022).

The speed at which active dunes migrate would limit the overall exposure time of previously deposited limestone (Bristow et al., 2005).

In order to try and limit the overestimation of subaerial weathering, we employ a lower weathering rate than regularly cited for coastal limestone facies (e.g., 100 vs. 250 m Myr -1 , Trudgill et al., 1979).