Table 3 reports the performance with different knowledge generation baselines.

Generally, random sentences barely help and even hurt the inference model, whereas context sentences of the question provide some gain.

In contrast, knowledge generated by our method consistently leads to substantial performance improvements, which implies that our knowledge is of high quality.

Knowledge is an essential factor.

The few-shot GPT-3 model is poorly calibrated to directly answer commonsense questions, underperforming our best models by 14% to 20% across all tasks.

Even when we use answers generated by few-shot GPT-3 to prompt the SOTA inference models, this still significantly falls behind our method on almost all the tasks and models we consider (with one exception -CSQA with T5 inference).

Through the medium of knowledge, our method can effectively leverage useful information possessed by GPT-3 to help improve even the SOTA models on various commonsense reasoning tasks.

Our knowledge outperform template generated knowledge.

We compare our knowledge generation method with the template-based self-talk on the CSQA dev set.

(CSQA is the only task we experiment with that has self-talk templates available.) Our method leads to a larger improvement over the T5-11b baseline than self-talk (by 1.89%), showing that it is better at eliciting helpful knowledge from models.

Our knowledge is comparable with retrievalbased knowledge.

On NumerSense, the retrieved knowledge only improves inference performance by 0.18% on test-core and 1.02% on test-all, while our method further outperforms it by 8.83% and 7.37%, respectively.

This shows that knowledge retrieved from a loosely-related knowledge base can be far less useful than our generated knowledge.

On CSQA2, although we are not able to beat the web-retrieved knowledge,  our method still bridges the performance gap without referring to Google search.

For QASC, the "retrieved" knowledge is actually gold knowledge from a knowledge base that was used to construct the dataset.

As a result, our generated knowledge falls significantly short of the retrieved knowledge.

In summary, our generated knowledge is roughly comparable with retrieved knowledge in terms of downstream performance, and is most valuable when there is no appropriate in-domain knowledge base to retrieve from.