Exploring Prediction Uncertainty In Machine Translation Quality Estimation

Abstract

Introduction

Probabilistic Models For Qe

Gaussian Process Regression

Here we follow closely the definition of GPs given by Rasmussen and Williams (2006).

Let X = {(x 1 , y 1 ), (x 2 , y 2 ), . . . , (x n , y n )} be our data, where each x ∈ R D is a D-dimensional input and y is its corresponding response variable.

A GP is defined as a stochastic model over the latent function f that generates the data X :

f (x) ∼ GP(m(x), k(x, x )),

where m(x) is the mean function, which is usually the 0 constant, and k(x, x ) is the kernel or covariance function, which describes the covariance between values of f at the different locations of x and x .

The prior is combined with a likelihood via Bayes' rule to obtain a posterior over the latent function:

p(f |X ) = p(y|X, f )p(f ) p(y|X) ,

where X and y are the training inputs and response variables, respectively.

For regression, we assume that each y i = f (x i ) + η, where η ∼ N (0, σ 2 n ) is added white noise.

Having a Gaussian likelihood results in a closed form solution for the posterior.

Training a GP involves the optimisation of model hyperparameters, which is done by maximising the marginal likelihood p(y|X) via gradient ascent.

Predictive posteriors for unseen x * are obtained by integrating over the latent function evaluations at x * .

GPs can be extended in many different ways by applying different kernels, likelihoods and modifying the posterior, for instance.

In the next Sections, we explain in detail some sensible modelling choices in applying GPs for QE.

Matèrn Kernels

Choosing an appropriate kernel is a crucial step in defining a GP model (and any other kernel method).

A common choice is to employ the exponentiated quadratic (EQ) kernel 1 :

k EQ (x, x ) = σ v exp(- r 2 2 ) ,

where

r 2 = D i=1 (x i -x i ) 2 l 2 i

is the scaled distance between the two inputs, σ v is a scale hyperparameter and l is a vector of lengthscales.

Most kernel methods tie all lengthscale to a single value, resulting in an isotropic kernel.

However, since in GPs hyperparameter optimisation can be done efficiently, it is common to employ one lengthscale per feature, a method called Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD).

The EQ kernel allows the modelling of nonlinearities between the inputs and the response variables but it makes a strong assumption: it generates smooth, infinitely differentiable functions.

This assumption can be too strong for noisy data.

An alternative is the Matèrn class of kernels, which relax the smoothness assumption by modelling functions which are ν-times differentiable only.

Common values for ν are the half-integers 3/2 and 5/2, resulting in the following Matèrn kernels:

k M32 = σ v (1 + √ 3r 2 ) exp(- √ 3r 2 ) k M52 = σ v 1 + √ 5r 2 + 5r 2 3 exp(- √ 5r 2 ) ,

where we have omitted the dependence of k M32 and k M52 on the inputs (x, x ) for brevity.

Higher values for ν are usually not very useful since the resulting behaviour is hard to distinguish from limit case ν → ∞, which retrieves the EQ kernel (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006, Sec. 4.2).

The relaxed smoothness assumptions from the Matèrn kernels makes them promising candidates for QE datasets, which tend to be very noisy.

We expect that employing them will result in a better models for this application.

Warped Gaussian Processes

The Gaussian likelihood of standard GPs has support over the entire real number line.

However, common quality scores are strictly positive values, which means that the Gaussian assumption 1 Also known as Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel.

is not ideal.

A usual way to deal with this problem is model the logarithm of the response variables, since this transformation maps strictly positive values to the real line.

However, there is no reason to believe this is the best possible mapping: a better idea would be to learn it from the data.

Warped GPs (Snelson et al., 2004) are an extension of GPs that allows the learning of arbitrary mappings.

It does that by placing a monotonic warping function over the observations and modelling the warped values inside a standard GP.

The posterior distribution is obtained by applying a change of variables:

p(y * |x * ) = f (y * ) 2πσ 2 * exp f (y * ) -µ * 2σ * ,

where µ * and σ * are the mean and standard deviation of the latent (warped) response variable and f and f are the warping function and its derivative.

Point predictions from this model depend on the loss function to be minimised.

For absolute error, the median is the optimal value while for squared error it is the mean of the posterior.

In standard GPs, since the posterior is Gaussian the median and mean coincide but this in general is not the case for a Warped GP posterior.

The median can be easily obtained by applying the inverse warping function to the latent median:

y med * = f -1 (µ * ).

While the inverse of the warping function is usually not available in closed form, we can use its gradient to have a numerical estimate.

The mean is obtained by integrating y * over the latent density:

E[y * ] = f -1 (z)N z (µ * , σ 2 * )dz,

where z is the latent variable.

This can be easily approximated using Gauss-Hermite quadrature since it is a one dimensional integral over a Gaussian density.

The warping function should be flexible enough to allow the learning of complex mappings, but it needs to be monotonic.

Snelson et al. (2004) proposes a parametric form composed of a sum of tanh functions, similar to a neural network layer:

f (y) = y + I i=1 a i tanh(b i (y + c i )),

where I is the number of tanh terms and a, b and c are treated as model hyperparameters and optimised jointly with the kernel and likelihood hyperparameters.

Large values for I allow more complex mappings to be learned but raise the risk of overfitting.

Warped GPs provide an easy and elegant way to model response variables with non-Gaussian behaviour within the GP framework.

In our experiments we explore models employing warping functions with up to 3 terms, which is the value recommended by Snelson et al. (2004).

We also report results using the f (y) = log(y) warping function.

Intrinsic Uncertainty Evaluation

Experimental Settings

Results And Discussion

Qualitative Analysis

Asymmetric Risk Scenarios

Evaluation metrics for QE, including those used in the WMT QE shared tasks, are assumed to be symmetric, i.e., they penalise over and underestimates equally.

This assumption is however too simplistic for many possible applications of QE.

For example:

• In a post-editing scenario, a project manager may have translators with limited expertise in post-editing.

In this case, automatic translations should not be provided to the translator unless they are highly likely to have very good quality.

This can be enforced this by increasing the penalisation weight for underestimates.

We call this the pessimistic scenario.

• In a gisting scenario, a company wants to automatically translate their product reviews so that they can be published in a foreign language without human intervention.

The company would prefer to publish only the reviews translated well enough, but having more reviews published will increase the chances of selling products.

In this case, having better recall is more important and thus only reviews with very poor translation quality should be discarded.

We can accomplish this by heavier penalisation on overestimates, a scenario we call optimistic.

In this Section we show how these scenarios can be addressed by well-calibrated predictive distributions and by employing asymmetric loss functions.

An example of such a function is the asymmetric linear (henceforth, AL) loss, which is a generalisation of the absolute error:

L(ŷ, y) = w(ŷ -y) if ŷ > y y -ŷ if ŷ ≤ y,

where w > 0 is the weight given to overestimates.

If w > 1 we have the pessimistic scenario, and the optimistic one can be obtained using 0 < w < 1.

For w = 1 we retrieve the original absolute error loss.

Another asymmetric loss is the linear exponential or linex loss (Zellner, 1986):

L(ŷ, y) = exp[w(ŷ -y)] -(ŷ -y) -1

where w ∈ R is the weight.

This loss attempts to keep a linear penalty in lesser risk regions, while imposing an exponential penalty in the higher risk ones.

Negative values for w will result in a pessimistic setting, while positive values will result in the optimistic one.

For w = 0, the loss approximates a squared error loss.

Usual values for w tend to be close to 1 or -1 since for higher weights the loss can quickly reach very large scores.

Both losses are shown on Figure 3.

Figure 3: Asymmetric losses.

These curves correspond to the pessimistic scenario since they impose larger penalties when the prediction is lower than the true label.

In the optimistic scenario the curves would be reflected with respect to the vertical axis.

Bayes Risk For Asymmetric Losses

The losses introduced above can be incorporated directly into learning algorithms to obtain models for a given scenario.

In the context of the AL loss this is called quantile regression (Koenker, 2005), since optimal estimators for this loss are posterior quantiles.

However, in a production environment the loss can change over time.

For instance, in the gisting scenario discussed above the parameter w could be changed based on feedback from indicators of sales revenue or user experience.

If the loss is attached to the underlying learning algorithms, a change in w would require full model retraining, which can be costly.

Instead of retraining the model every time there is a different loss, we can train a single probabilistic model and derive Bayes risk estimators for the loss we are interested in.

This allows estimates to be obtained without having to retrain models when the loss changes.

Additionally, this allows different losses/scenarios to be employed at the same time using the same model.

Minimum Bayes risk estimators for asymmetric losses were proposed by Christoffersen and Diebold (1997) and we follow their derivations in our experiments.

The best estimator for the AL loss is equivalent to the w w+1 quantile of the predictive distribution.

Note that we retrieve the median when w = 1, as expected.

The best estimator for the linex loss can be easily derived and results in:

ŷ = µ y - wσ 2 y 2

where µ y and σ 2 y are the mean and the variance of the predictive posterior.

Experimental Settings

Results And Discussion

Related Work

Conclusions

Figure 1: Predictive distributions for two fr-en instances under a Standard GP and a Warped GP.

The top two plots correspond to a prediction with low absolute error, while the bottom two plots show the behaviour when the absolute error is high.

Figure 2: Warping function instances from the three datasets.

The vertical axis correspond to the latent warped values.

The horizontal axis show the observed response variables, which are always positive in our case since they are post-editing times.