In this work, we carry out the first large-scale human evaluation on conversational QA systems.

We show that current standard automatic evaluation with gold history cannot reflect models' performance in human evaluation, and that humanmachine conversations have a large distribution shift from static conversational QA datasets of human-human conversations.

To tackle these problems, we propose to use predicted history with rewriting invalid questions for evaluation, which reduces the gap between automatic evaluations and real-world human evaluation.

Based on the insights from the human evaluation results, we also nalyze current conversational QA systems and identify promising directions for future development.

In question rewriting, we use F1 instead of exact match to check whether two entites are the same.

The reason is that sometimes the prediction may mention the same entity as the gold answer does, but with different names.

Figure 8 gives an example.

Thus to avoid the false positive of detecting invalid questions, we take the F1 metric.

B Quality of Rewriting Questions Detection.

After manually checking 100 conversations of ExCorD from the QuAC development set, we find that Auto-Rewrite can detect invalid questions with a precision of 72% and a recall of 72%.

We notice that the coreference model sometimes detects the pronoun of the main character in the passage as insolvable, although it almost shows up in every question.

This issue causes the low precision but is not a serious problem in our case -whether rewriting the pronoun of the main character does not affect models' prediction much, because the model always sees the passage and knows who the main character is.

Rewriting.

Among all correctly detected invalid questions, we further check the quality of rewriting, and in 68% of the times Auto-Rewrite gives a correct context-independent questions.

The most common error is being ungrammatical.

For example, using the gold history of "... Dee Dee claimed that Spector once pulled a gun on him", the original question "Did they arrest him for doing this?" was rewritten to "Did they arrest Phillip Harvey Spector for doing pulled?" While this creates a distribution shift on question formats, it is still better than putting an invalid question in the flow.

Figure 9 shows an example where extra information in context-independent questions confuses the model and leads to incorrect prediction.