In this paper we have considered the hypernym prediction task, the task of identifying the correct direct hypernym in a taxonomy of a synset given its embedding.

In terms of evaluation, we have focused on both "exact match" (H@1) and "ballpark match" (WuP) metrics, and we have for the first time provided a comparison of existing models that had not previously been evaluated with the same metrics or on the same datasets.

We have introduced two simple encoder-decoder based models for hypernym prediction that make use of information in the full taxonomy paths, finding that in particular hypo2path rev shows state-of-the-art performance on the WN18RR-hp dataset.

For nouns, it achieves improvements of 5.17 test H@1 over the best benchmark model.

For verbs, we find that no model achieves a high performance.

Instance nouns, on the other hand, are the easiest to predict.

Encouragingly, we find that "ballpark match" (WuP) for instance nouns is at over 87 points.

There are several directions for future work.

Encoding lemmas separately and with attention, rather than with a single embedding, could allow the attention mechanism to assign lower weights to less informative, misleading, or polysemous lemma names (which were related to over a third of all errors).

One potential way to handle polysemy could involve encoding both synsets and glosses, using either classical word embeddings or contextualized word embeddings.

Another extension of this work is to use multi-task learning with multiple decoders and different tasks, similar to Luong et al. (2016).

For example, in addition to learning to decode a path of hypernyms leading to a given synset, a model could also generate the synset's co-hyponyms or its hypernym's lexname 19 .

Our results suggest that hypernym prediction is challenging for words which occur less frequently in the corpus used to compute embeddings.

Methods are needed which can learn more effectively from low-frequency data, where the "unknown word" does not appear very often (Herbelot and Baroni, 2017;Kabbach et al., 2019).