Hypernymy, or the IS-A relation, is one of the most important lexical relations.

It is used to create taxonomies of terms and it is the main organizational criterion of nouns and verbs in WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998).

Learning hypernymy is also important in practice, as knowing a word's hypernyms gives an approximation of its meaning, and enables inferences in downstream tasks such as question answering and reading comprehension.

Predicting hypernymy is still a challenging task for word embeddings (Pinter and Eisenstein, 2018;Bernier-Colborne and Barriere, 2018;Nickel and Kiela, 2018) and previous studies have shown that it is more difficult to predict hypernymy than other lexical relations (Balažević et al., 2019;Allen et al., 2019).

Hypernymy prediction is often evaluated against a given taxonomy, typically WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998).

The main hypothesis that we pursue in this paper is that knowledge of this taxonomy, in particular of taxonomy paths, will be helpful for hypernymy prediction.

So we introduce two simple encoderdecoder based models for hypernym prediction that make use of information in the full taxonomy paths.

There has been much recent work on modeling lexical relations based on distributed representations (Pinter and Eisenstein, 2018;Bernier-Colborne and Barriere, 2018;Nickel and Kiela, 2018).

However, the task formulations and evaluation datasets have differed widely, making it hard to compare different approaches.

We focus on evaluating on hypernymy, rather than jointly on many relations, which can mask strong performance differences across relations.

We evaluate our encoder-decoder models against several previous models that have not been evaluated in the same setting before.

Like many other approaches, we use WordNet as the basis for our experiments.

We formulate the task as the task of finding the correct point to attach a new node (synset) to the WordNet taxonomy.

We build on the existing WN18RR dataset (Dettmers et al., 2018), but filter its hypernymy pairs to produce WN18RR-hp, a subset that is leak-free with respect to approaches that use taxonomy paths during training, as we do.

We find that one of our new models, hyper2path, achieves state-of-the-art performance on hypernym prediction on WN18RR-hp, exceeding the best performance of benchmark models by 4.11 points in accuracy of the highest-ranked prediction (hit-at-one, H@1).

In particular, we observe the greatest performance gain in noun hypernym prediction, where it improves over the best benchmark by 5.17 H@1 points.

1: We frame hypernym prediction as a sequence generation problem.

Given a query hyponym (e.g., pizza.n.01), the hypo2path rev model generates its taxonomy path, from its direct hypernym (dish.n.02) to the root node (entity.n.01). and indicate a correct and an incorrect prediction, respectively.

In each example, an underlined synset corresponds to what the model predicted as a direct hypernym.