Leveraging Wordnet Paths For Neural Hypernym Prediction

Abstract

Introduction

Hypernym Prediction

Several tasks related to hypernymy have been proposed under different names: extracting is-a relations from text (hypernym discovery) (Hearst, 1992;Snow et al., 2005;Camacho-Collados et al., 2018), binary classification of whether two given words are in a hypernym relation (hypernym detection) (Weeds et al., 2014;Shwartz et al., 2016;Roller et al., 2018), and constructing or extending a taxonomy (taxonomy induction) (Snow et al., 2006;Jurgens and Pilehvar, 2016).

Another recently introduced task is hierarchical path completion (Alsuhaibani et al., 2019), where, given a hypernym path of length 4 from WordNet, the task is to predict the correct hyponym(s).

While hypernymy has long been studied in computational lexical semantics, another thread of recent research on hypernymy comes from the literature on knowledge base completion (Bordes et al., 2013;Nickel and Kiela, 2017;Pinter and Eisenstein, 2018;Dettmers et al., 2018).

Here, hypernymy is considered as one of multiple different semantic relations between two nodes in a graph.

Extending from this line of research, we also consider the relation prediction task in a semantic graph, but only focus on one relation of interest, hypernymy.

Like previous work in knowledge base completion (Bordes et al., 2013;Nickel and Kiela, 2017;Pinter and Eisenstein, 2018;Balažević et al., 2019), we take WordNet as our experimental space, so we learn hypernymy between synsets rather than raw lemmas.

A synset is a basic lexical unit in WordNet, defined as a set of lemmas that are synonymous to each other.

A synset thus also functions as one of the senses for each of the lemmas in the set.

For example, the synset mark.n.01 (a number or letter indicating quality) consists of the three lemmas mark, grade, and score.

Given a new synset, which we call the source node, our task is to predict its direct hypernym or target node from among the synsets in WordNet.

For example, for the source node woolly daisy.n.01, the model should identify wildflower.n.01 as the target node in the graph.

While some previous approaches have predicted indirect hypernyms using the transitive closure of WordNet (Vendrov et al., 2016;Li et al., 2019), we focus on predicting direct hypernyms.

Datasets for indirect hypernymy often include hypernyms that are too generic and not informative enough, where some semantically distant concepts are trivially mapped to the root node (entity.n.01) or a high-level hypernym near the root.

We also restrict ourselves to modeling hypernym relations specifically, unlike much work on WN18RR which learns hypernymy as one of 11 lexical relations (Bordes et al., 2013;Pinter and Eisenstein, 2018;Balažević et al., 2019).

As we discuss in Section 5, we observe that hypernymy is more effectively learned when trained on its own.

Models

Path Generators: Hypo2Path And Hypo2Hyper

In our first model, we treat hypernym prediction as a sequence generation task: given a hyponym, the goal is to generate the entire path in the WordNet taxonomy starting from the root node (entity.n.01 for nouns) and ending with the direct hypernym.

For example, flock.n.02 should be mapped to its hypernym path by generating entity.n.01 abstraction.n.06 group.n.01 biological group.n.01 animal group.n.01.

So the model is tasked to translate source synsets to target synset sequences.

We denote this model as hypo2path.

Our intuition behind this model is that training with a more difficult objective (i.e., entire hypernym path prediction rather than direct hypernym prediction) may result in a stronger model.

We use a standard LSTM-based sequence-to-sequence model (Sutskever et al., 2014) with Luong-style attention (Luong et al., 2015).

This encodes a synset embedding of a hyponym into a hidden state, which is taken as the initial state of the LSTM decoder.

The decoder generates synsets sequentially, conditioned on previously generated synsets.

While the attention mechanism assigns weights to the source tokens, here we only have a single source token (i.e., a query hyponym).

In our task, the attention mechanism serves as a way to avoid "forgetting" the source hyponym while decoding long paths2 .

Reversing the order of the source or target sequences can the improve performance of encoder-decoder models, since the encoded hidden state is closer to the first target token (Sutskever et al., 2014;Gillick et al., 2016).

Motivated by this, we experiment with a model variant called hypo2path rev in which we reverse the target path to generate a sequence of hypernyms starting from the direct hypernym of the source.

This frames every generation step as direct hypernym prediction, which the decoder may more easily learn.

Examples of generated reversed paths are shown in Table 1.

In order to determine whether generating an entire hypernym path as an auxiliary task helps to accurately predict a synset's direct hypernym, or whether generating only the direct hypernym is enough, we also perform experiments with hypo2hyper, a variant of hypo2path.

Here the encoder-decoder model is trained to only generate a direct hypernym (i.e., both the source and target sequences are of length 1).3

Path Encoder

We also examine the reverse approach: training an LSTM encoder that learns vector representations of hypernym paths.

Given a query hyponym, we construct an embedding of a hypernym path (from the root node down), and the model is tasked to distinguish the gold path (which ends at its direct hypernym) from distractor paths.

We construct path embeddings using a bidirectional LSTM followed by a fullyconnected layer.

The output corresponding to the last hidden state is the encoded path vector.

We denote this model as Path Encoder.

Given the training set S consisting of pairs (x, p) of a hyponym and a path,4 we train the model by minimizing the Euclidean distance of encoded path vectors V p and the embedding vectors of the hyponym V x .

In addition, the model is trained to maximize the distance of V p and V x from the negative examples {(p, x )|( * , x ) ∈ S} which are generated by randomly pairing a hyponym with a random path.

The model is optimized with the following ranking loss function:

L = max{0, V p -V x 2 -V p -V x 2 + γ}

where γ is a positive margin hyperparameter.

During prediction, the model first encodes all hypernym paths {p|(p, * ) ∈ S}. Then for each query hyponym x the path that minimizes V p -V x 2 is returned as the predicted hypernym path.

From this path, we take the predicted direct hypernym of x for evaluation, just as we do for hypo2path.5

Benchmark Models

Other Path Encoding Approaches

Evaluation Metrics

Synset Embeddings

Averaged Lemma Vectors Following Pinter and Eisenstein (2018)9 , we computed an embedding for each synset by averaging the pretrained fastText embeddings (Bojanowski et al., 2017) 10 of its synonyms (lemmas).

If a synset contained any multi-word lemma, the words within the lemma were averaged.

We used these synset embeddings for all our reported experiments.11

Model Details

Results And Discussion

Error Analysis

Conclusion And Future Work

punishment.n.01 social control.n.01 . . .

entity.n.01 self-discipline.n.01 compulsive.n.01 *sick person.n.01 unfortunate.n.01 person.n.01 . . .

entity.n.01 person.n.01

sum, we use three different types of hypernym relation sets (noun, instance noun, verb) in our experiments.

The number of examples in WN18RR-hp is shown in Table 2.

Data statistics of hyponym-hypernym pairs in WN18RR-hp.

Scores for nouns.

Scores for instance nouns.

Scores for verbs.

Aggregated scores across all three groups.

Four typical error patterns and examples observed from hypo2path rev evaluated on nouns (validation set).

Altogether, they account for 50.8% of the total errors.

Words within square brackets after a synset are the set of lemmas of the synset.

The boldfaced are the shared lemmas/words.