We have presented NLU++, a novel dataset for task-oriented dialogue (ToD) NLU that overcomes the shortcomings of previous NLU evaluation sets.

NLU++ presents a multi-intent and slot-rich ontology, defines generic and domain-specific intents and slots to promote data reusability, and it focuses on the creation of high-quality complex examples and annotations collected by dialogue experts.

Experimental results show that NLU++ raises the bar with respect to current NLU benchmarks, helping better discriminate and compare the performance of current state-of-the-art NLU models, particularly in low-data setups.

We hope that NLU++ will be valuable in guiding future modeling efforts for ToD NLU, both in academia and in industry.

Limitations and Future Work.

This work has shown that a better design of the intent set can improve data reusability.

However, the current ontology does not cover generic sets of intents exhaustively, and we acknowledge a (sometimes) fine line between truly generic intents versus intents 'anecdotally' shared by two domains (e.g., refund).

Further, the boundaries of some generic intents can sometimes be unclear and difficult to annotate, even for expert annotators.

18 Future work should try to ground the set of generic intents.

Further, we believe that span-based annotation might be sub-optimal for canonical values such as times and dates, where small differences in the span would lead to evaluation errors but would not suppose a problem for the value to be parsed.

In addition, separating time and date intervals in different slots increases the difficulty of the annotations and models need to learn a more conflicting set of slots.

Further, NLU++ currently provides fine-grained slots such as date_from, date_to and date to enable more complex scenarios, but such a design might slow down annotation process and make it cumbersome.

Future work includes rethinking the SL task for these slots.

Finally, while single-turn NLU is more dataefficient and easier to model, some user utterances only make sense in the presence of context from the previous system utterance.

While some previous datasets (Coope et al., 2020) deal with this issue with the help of extra annotations indicating if a slot has been requested, in this work we opt for using non-contextualised slots such as number and time and let the policy handle the contextualisation.

However, future work should start looking into NLU datasets composed by system + user turns.

Before data collection: all the data has been collected by workers of PolyAI Limited and all the annotators are also employees of PolyAI Limited.

During data collection: we did not include any personal information (e.g. personal names or addresses) and all the examples that included any had been fully anonymised or removed from the dataset.

All the names in the dataset are created by randomly concatenating names and surnames from the list of the top 10K names from the US registry.

Upon collection, the dataset has undergone an additional check by the internal Ethics committee of the company.

NLU++ is licensed under CC-BY-4.0.

The complete ontology of NLU++ is provided in Table 9 andTable 10.

Detection Experiments

CONVERT (Henderson et al., 2020) is trained with the conversational response selection objective (Henderson et al., 2019b) on large Reddit data (Al-Rfou et al., 2016;Henderson et al., 2019a), spanning more than 700M (context, response) sentence pairs.

Thanks to its naturally conversational pretraining objective, it has been shown to be especially well-suited for conversational tasks such as intent detection (Casanueva et al., 2020) and slot labelling (Coope et al., 2020).

It outputs 1,024-dim sentence encodings.

github.com/davidalami/ConveRT LABSE.

Language-agnostic BERT Sentence Embedding (LaBSE) (Feng et al., 2020) adapts pretrained multilingual BERT (mBERT) (Devlin et al., 2019) using a dual-encoder framework (Yang et al., 2019) with larger embedding capacity (i.e., a shared multilingual vocabulary of 500k subwords).

While LaBSE is the current state-of-the-art multilingual encoder, it also displays very strong monolingual English performance (Feng et al., 2020).

It produces 768-dim sentence encodings.

huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/ LaBSE ROBL-1B and LM12-1B (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019;Thakur et al., 2021) are sentence encoders which fine-tune the pretrained Roberta-Large (ROBL) language model (Liu et al., 2019a) and the 12-layer MiniLM (Wang et al., 2020b), respectively, again using a contrastive dual-encoder framework (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019).

The models are fine-tuned on a set of more than 1B sentence pairs: this set comprises various data such as Reddit 2015-2018 comments (Henderson et al., 2019a), Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), PAQ (question, answer) pairs (Lewis et al., 2021), to name only a few.

19 ROBL-1B outputs 19 In a nutshell, the contrastive fine-tuning task which combines all the heterogeneous datasets is as follows: given a 'query' sentence from each sentence pair, and a set of R randomly sampled negatives plus

1 true positive (the sentence from the same pair), the model should predict which sentence from the set of R + 1 sentences is actually paired with the query sentence in the dataset.

The full list of all datasets along with the exact model specifications is at:

1,024-dim encodings, while LM12-1B produces 384-dim encodings.

We opted for those two models in particular as one represents a class of large sentence encoders (ROBL-1B), and the other is lightweight (LM12-1B), while both display very strong performance in a myriad of sentence similarity and semantic search tasks, see www.sbert.net/docs/ pretrained_models.html.

We rely on the same SQuAD-tuned language models as Namazifar et al. (2021).

ROBB-QA can be found online at: https://huggingface.

co/deepset/roberta-base-squad2; ALB-QA is available at: https://huggingface.co/twmkn9/ albert-base-v2-squad2 D Appendix: Slot Labeling Baselines CONVEX (Henderson and Vulić, 2021) demonstrates strong SL performance, especially in fewshot settings.

It is pretrained on a pairwise cloze task extracted from the Reddit examples (Henderson et al., 2019a), and the majority of the pretrained model's parameters in CONVEX are kept frozen during fine-tuning, making it an extremely efficient model.

We adopt the suggested hyper-parameters from Henderson and Vulić (2021).

QA-Based: Namazifar et al. ( 2021) train an extractive QA-based model to extract the spans of the slots from the input user utterance as answers to manually defined natural language questions (one per slot).

It follows the same idea as QA-based ID models.

We also provide such questions for each slot along with NLU++ for model training and inference: see the questions in Table 10.

huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/ all-roberta-large-v1.