We used ISAM equipped with a spring wheat module to study the carbon fluxes in spring wheat agroecosystems across the wheat-growing regions of India for the last 4 decades.

The ISAM spring wheat module ISAM dyn_wheat simulated the temporal patterns of GPP, TER, and NEP at the site scale for the IARI experimental wheat farm.

The main conclusions from this study are as follows.

-Carbon fluxes in spring wheat agroecosystems varied widely across the country due to divergent climatic conditions and management practices, primarily due to differences in planting dates.

While the central and eastern parts of the spring wheat-growing regions showed high carbon fluxes during January, the northern parts exhibited their maximum carbon flux values during March.

-The effects of increasing [CO 2 ], nitrogen fertilization, and irrigation led to positive trends in carbon fluxes in the last 4 decades.

Nitrogen fertilization had the strongest effects, followed by [CO 2 ] and water availability.

Providing sufficient fertilizers and water through irrigation may counteract the adverse effects of high temperatures.

-The limitation on water available through irrigation in the future in regions like Punjab and Haryana might adversely affect the spring wheat growth and, as a result, the carbon fluxes from this agroecosystem.

Understanding the variability in terrestrial carbon fluxes is essential for understanding the carbon cycle.

Agroecosystems cover large parts of the terrestrial biosphere, with the spring wheat agroecosystem being one of India's most extensive land use types.

This paper is one of the first longterm regional-scale studies to examine carbon dynamics in an Indian agroecosystem.

After appropriate calibration, the model developed in this study can also be used to study other agroecosystems.

Very importantly, it can serve as a tool to conduct numerical experiments to study future scenarios and the effects of external drivers.

Thus, this study will likely be crucial in advancing our understanding of terrestrial carbon dynamics and our ability to simulate their behavior.