In our detection procedure ridge regression (RR) models are trained on simulated spatial patterns of precipitation with known forcings to determine fingerprints of the modelled forced response of annual mean total precipitation (PRCP-TOT) and annual extreme precipitation (Rx1d: precipitation accumulation on the day with most precipitation each year).

The fingerprints are such that they predict the global forced response from the spatial locations where observational data are available.

The RR fingerprints are applied to observations to isolate an estimate of the real-world forced response from internal variability.

Several data processing and regression steps are needed to achieve this.

We describe the general procedures here; Sect.

S1 in the Supplement contains additional details, and Sippel et al. (2020) describe the method used here in detail.

Our method bears similarity to (non-)optimal fingerprinting methods for D&A which have been developed over the past decades.

From Klaus Hasselmann's seminal paper on the signal-to-noise problem in detecting forced climate responses (Hasselmann, 1979), optimal fingerprinting (e.g. Hegerl et al., 1996;Allen and Stott, 2003;Ribes et al., 2013;Ribes and Terray, 2013) and detection methods based on pattern similarity (e.g. Santer et al., 1995Santer et al., , 2013;;Marvel and Bonfils, 2013) have evolved.

In optimal fingerprinting, observations are regressed on a "guess pattern" of the forced response derived from models, using an estimate of internal variability, resulting in scalars ("scaling factors") representing the strength of the guess patterns in observations.

Our ridge-regression-based detection method differs from this approach in that we do not regress observational data on simulated estimates of the forced response but determine a detection model based on model data only.

It is more closely related to pattern similarity methods, where an EOF (empirical orthogonal function)-based signal pattern is referred to as the fingerprint, and the projection of spatiotemporal observations onto this pattern yields a one-dimensional (temporal) estimate of the forced response in observations.

Our method builds on this in a straightforward way by adding a step to optimise the signal-to-noise ratio.

In our method, we project observations not onto the signal pattern directly but onto a regression coefficient pattern that "optimally" (linearly, op-timised by regularisation) projects simulated spatiotemporal Rx1d or PRCPTOT patterns onto a one-dimensional detection space based on the signal pattern (see Sect.

2.2 and 2.3 for details).

Regularisation optimises the regression coefficient pattern for a high signal-to-noise ratio across models and thus improves generalisability.

The detection metric is then applied to map spatiotemporal observations onto the one-dimensional detection space, thus extracting the forced response signature in the real-world climate.

We believe the advantages of our method lie in (1) its relative simplicity and close links to pattern-similarity-based D&A methods, while going beyond comparisons to the signal pattern (e.g. Santer et al., 2013;Marvel and Bonfils, 2013;Bonfils et al., 2020) or spatial aggregation techniques (e.g. Fischer and Knutti, 2014;Borodina et al., 2017), (2) the interpretable and intuitive fingerprint (spatial coefficient map) that reflects regions exhibiting high signal-tonoise ratio climate change signals, (3) the fact that the estimate of the observed forced response is a time series, allowing for analysis of trends, and (4) the possibility of straightforwardly introducing additional constraints to, for instance, increase robustness of detection with respect to specific climate uncertainties, such as decadal-scale internal variability (Sippel et al., 2021).

This method fits in recent developments in D&A that move towards mapping multidimensional data onto a one-dimensional detection space.

Studies based on neural networks and deep learning for D&A (e.g. Barnes et al., 2019Barnes et al., , 2020;;Labe and Barnes, 2021;Madakumbura et al., 2021) employ non-linear methods but use a very similar framework with similar goals.

We do not argue that ridge regression is fundamentally better than any of the mentioned methods, but we are convinced that the intuitive, physical outputs combined with a high signal-to-noise ratio can be valuable for trend detection and attribution.

We use model simulations from 13 CMIP phase 6 (CMIP6) models with at least three members with historical and SSP245 data (Eyring et al., 2016).

For models that have more than three of such members, the first three are selected.

We include a large number of models and multiple members per model to cover as large a range of the physically plausible climate responses as possible.

Including multiple members per model accounts for within-model internal variability, and including multiple models accounts additionally for across-model variability and uncertainty.

Furthermore, the high number of models used ensures that one single model with, for example, a deviating high or low climate sensitivity, does not have a strong effect on the combined result.

As unforced control data, 450-year piControl simulations for 10 out of the 13 models are available and used, i.e. 4500 years of unforced data.

Long piControl simulations are used to sample a representative distribution of unforced trends, increasing confidence in the assessment of whether forced trends lie outside the likely range of unforced trends.

See Table S1 in the Supplement for an overview of CMIP6 data used.

In an effort to address observational uncertainty, three observational datasets are used: for Rx1d, data from the Hadley Centre global indices of extremes v3 (HadEX3) (Dunn et al., 2020) (1.875 • × 1.25 • , 1951-2018), and Global Historical Climatology Network Daily EXtremes (GHCNDEX) (Donat et al., 2013)   are used.

For PRCPTOT, data from HadEX3, GHCNDEX, and the Global Precipitation Climatology Centre (GPCC) (Schneider et al., 2017) (2.5 • × 2.5 • , 1951-2019) are used.

GPCC does not provide extreme indices and is therefore only used for PRCP-TOT.

All three observational datasets are gridded data derived from station observations (Dunn et al., 2020;Donat et al., 2013;Schneider et al., 2017).

HadEX3 and GHCN-DEX only provide values for grid cells where three stations are available within the decorrelation length scale of the gridding procedure, leading to spatially incomplete maps.

GPCC, on the other hand, interpolates to all land grid cells.

In order to create a reliable GPCC record comparable to the other datasets, we mask this data to include only grid cells in which data from three stations were available, as per the station density data provided in GPCC as well.

(2.5 • × 2.5 • ,

Coverage differs for each time step within each dataset.

In order to generate time-independent fingerprints, we create one single coverage mask for each dataset representative of 1951-present.

Grid cells for which a maximum of three time steps (years) is missing are included, the missing time steps are set to the time mean of the grid cell in question.

This implies that the total fraction of filled-in data points (grid cells × time steps) ranges from 0.4 %-0.9 %.

We note that the nature of model data and observational gridded data differs, as model precipitation values are spatial grid cell averages, whereas methods to grid station-based point observations onto a regular grid result in values representative of grid cell centres (Dunn et al., 2020).

This is mainly a result of station observations being too sparse to allow for reliable estimation of gridded area mean values.

In addition, gridded observational data for Rx1d are constructed by first extracting station maxima and then gridding these, creating an aggregated area maximum value (Dunn et al., 2020;Donat et al., 2013).

In contrast, Rx1d determined from model data reflects the maximum of the grid cell average precipitation.

These structural differences affect precipitation indices, extreme indices in particular, and reduce the direct comparability of model and observational absolute precipitation values.

This observation-model discrepancy can be overcome by using daily, gridded observational data such as Rainfall Estimates on a Gridded Network (REGEN) (Contractor et al., 2020), but reliable datasets with long records of this kind are not numerous.

Trend biases due to these structural differences have been shown to be negligible, however, justifying the comparison between models and observations made in this study (Dunn et al., 2020;Avila et al., 2015).

In order to put the detection results in context, we first assess the general characteristics of historical precipitation trends in models and observations.

Figure 2 shows maps of annual linear trends for PRCPTOT and Rx1d from the CMIP6 historical multi-model mean and the observational datasets over the 1951-2014 period.

For PRCPTOT the model trend map (Fig. 2a) shows the well-established mean precipitation forced change spatial pattern, including a net global increase and an intensification of the global water cycle pattern (Douville et al., 2021).

All observational datasets (Fig. 2c, e andg) contain features that resemble the multi-model mean forced patterns such as wetting at high latitudes.

There are also some regions, such as Southeast Asia and western Africa, where observed and simulated trends have opposite signs.

Uncertainties in the net precipitation response to the opposing forcing effects of greenhouse gases and aerosols in the second half of the 20th century, as well as internal variability, likely play a role in these discrepancies (Bonfils et al., 2020).

The different observational datasets generally agree with one another, but a stronger trend over western North America in GHCNDEX (Fig. 2e) stands out.

For HadEX3, GHCNDEX, and GPCC, models and observations agree on the sign of the PRCPTOT trend for 74 %, 85 %, and 68 % of grid cells.

For Rx1d model trends (Fig. 2b) also reflect well-known changes, which are predominantly positive, especially over land.

Observational records (Fig. 2d andf) agree in that they also feature mostly positive trends.

For HadEX3 and GHCNDEX, models and observations agree on the sign of the Rx1d trend for 71 % and 75 % of grid cells.

The fact that simulated trend patterns appear smoother and smaller in magnitude than observational trend patterns is primarily due to multi-model mean averaging.

The first EOFs underlying the RR targets look virtually identical to the simulated trend patterns -spatial correlation coefficients exceed 0.99 -which implies that the first EOFs capture the forced trend signals (see Fig. S2).