Our baseline sequence tagging model is a hierarchical neural tagging model, closely following a number of recent studies (Ma and Hovy, 2016;Lample et al., 2016;Yang et al., 2017;Chiu and Nichols, 2016) (left side of Figure 2).

Given a sentence of tokens (t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t N ) it first forms a representation, x k , for each token by concatenating a character based representation c k with a token embedding w k :

c k = C(t k ; θ c ) w k = E(t k ; θ w ) x k = [c k ; w k ](1)

The character representation c k captures morphological information and is either a convolutional neural network (CNN) (Ma and Hovy, 2016;Chiu and Nichols, 2016) or RNN (Yang et al., 2017;Lample et al., 2016).

It is parameterized by C(•, θ c ) with parameters θ c .

The token embeddings, w k , are obtained as a lookup E(•, θ w ), initialized using pre-trained word embeddings, and fine tuned during training (Collobert et al., 2011).

To learn a context sensitive representation, we employ multiple layers of bidirectional RNNs.

For each token position, k, the hidden state h k,i of RNN layer i is formed by concatenating the hidden states from the forward ( -→ h k,i ) and backward ( ←h k,i ) RNNs.

As a result, the bidirectional RNN is able to use both past and future information to make a prediction at token k. More formally, for the first RNN layer that operates on

x k to output h k,1 : - → h k,1 = - → R 1 (x k , - → h k-1,1 ; θ-→ R 1 ) ← - h k,1 = ← - R 1 (x k , ← - h k+1,1 ; θ← - R 1 ) h k,1 = [ - → h k,1 ; ← - h k,1 ](2)

Step 2: Prepare word embedding and LM embedding for each token in the input sequence.

Two representations of the word "York"

Step 3: Use both word embeddings and LM embeddings in the sequence tagging model.

New York is located …

Figure 1: The main components in TagLM, our language-model-augmented sequence tagging system.

The language model component (in orange) is used to augment the input token representation in a traditional sequence tagging models (in grey).

The second RNN layer is similar and uses h k,1 to output h k,2 .

In this paper, we use L = 2 layers of RNNs in all experiments and parameterize R i as either Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014) or Long Short-Term Memory units (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) depending on the task.

Finally, the output of the final RNN layer h k,L is used to predict a score for each possible tag using a single dense layer.

Due to the dependencies between successive tags in our sequence labeling tasks (e.g. using the BIOES labeling scheme, it is not possible for I-PER to follow B-LOC), it is beneficial to model and decode each sentence jointly instead of independently predicting the label for each token.

Accordingly, we add another layer with parameters for each label bigram, computing the sentence conditional random field (CRF) loss (Lafferty et al., 2001)

New York is located ...

Token representation h 1,1 h 2 LM h 2,1 h 1,2 h 2,2

Figure 2: Overview of TagLM, our language model augmented sequence tagging architecture.

The top level embeddings from a pre-trained bidirectional LM are inserted in a stacked bidirectional RNN sequence tagging model.

See text for details.

Our combined system, TagLM, uses the LM embeddings as additional inputs to the sequence tagging model.

In particular, we concatenate the LM embeddings h LM with the output from one of the bidirectional RNN layers in the sequence model.

In our experiments, we found that introducing the LM embeddings at the output of the first layer performed the best.

More formally, we simply replace (2) with

h k,1 = [ - → h k,1 ; ← - h k,1 ; h LM k ].(3)

There are alternate possibilities for adding the LM embeddings to the sequence model.

One pos-sibility adds a non-linear mapping after the concatenation and before the second RNN (e.g. replacing (3) with f ([

- → h k,1 ; ← - h k,1 ; h LM k ])

where f is a non-linear function).

Another possibility introduces an attention-like mechanism that weights the all LM embeddings in a sentence before including them in the sequence model.

Our initial results with the simple concatenation were encouraging so we did not explore these alternatives in this study, preferring to leave them for future work.