Reading and reasoning about natural language text often requires trivial knowledge about everyday physical actions and objects.

For example, given a sentence "Shanice could fit the trophy into the suitcase," we can trivially infer that the trophy must be smaller than the suitcase even though it is not stated explicitly.

This reasoning requires knowledge about the action "fit"-in particular, typical preconditions that need to be satisfied in order to perform the action.

In addition, reasoning x is smaller than y

x is lighter than y

x is faster than y

x is less rigid than y Figure 1: An overview of our approach.

A verb's usage in language (top) implies physical relations between objects it takes as arguments.

This allows us to reason about properties of specific objects (middle), as well as the knowledge implied by the verb itself (bottom).

about the applicability of various physical actions in a given situation often requires background knowledge about objects in the world, for example, that people are usually smaller than houses, that cars generally move faster than humans walk, or that a brick probably is heavier than a feather.

In fact, the potential use of such knowledge about everyday actions and objects can go beyond language understanding and reasoning.

Many open challenges in computer vision and robotics may also benefit from such knowledge, as shown in recent work that requires visual reasoning and entailment (Izadinia et al., 2015;Zhu et al., 2014).

Ideally, an AI system should acquire such knowledge through direct physical interactions with the world.

However, such a physically interactive system does not seem feasible in the foreseeable future.

In this paper, we present an approach to acquire trivial physical knowledge from unstructured natural language text as an alternative knowledge source.

In particular, we focus on acquiring relative physical knowledge of actions and objects organized along five dimensions: size, weight, strength, rigidness, and speed.

Figure 1 illustrates example knowledge of (1) relative physical relations of object pairs and (2) physical implications of actions when applied to those object pairs.

While natural language text is a rich source to obtain broad knowledge about the world, compiling trivial commonsense knowledge from unstructured text is a nontrivial feat.

The central challenge lies in reporting bias: people rarely states the obvious (Gordon and Van Durme, 2013;Sorower et al., 2011;Misra et al., 2016;Zhang et al., 2017), since it goes against Grice's conversational maxim on the quantity of information (Grice, 1975).

In this work, we demonstrate that it is possible to overcome reporting bias and still extract the unspoken knowledge from language.

The key insight is this: there is consistency in the way people describe how they interact with the world, which provides vital clues to reverse engineer the common knowledge shared among people.

More concretely, we frame knowledge acquisition as joint inference over two closely related puzzles: inferring relative physical knowledge about object pairs while simultaneously reasoning about physical implications of actions.

Importantly, four of five dimensions of knowledge in our study-weight, strength, rigidness, and speed-are either not visual or not easily recognizable by image recognition using currently available computer vision techniques.

Thus, our work provides unique value to complement recent attempts to acquire commonsense knowledge from web images (Izadinia et al., 2015;Bagherinezhad et al., 2016;Sadeghi et al., 2015).

In sum, our contributions are threefold:

• We introduce a new task in the domain of commonsense knowledge extraction from language, focusing on the physical implica-tions of actions and the relative physical relations among objects, organized along five dimensions.

• We propose a model that can infer relations over grounded object pairs together with first order relations implied by physical verbs.

• We develop a new dataset VERBPHYSICS that compiles crowdsourced knowledge of actions and objects.1

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.

We first provide the formal definition of knowledge we aim to learn in Section 2.

We then describe our data collection in Section 3 and present our inference model in Section 4.

Empirical results are given in Section 5 and discussed in Section 6.

We review related work in Section 7 and conclude in Section 8.