To examine what factors contributed to particularly low adequacy scores, we identify sentences for which both annotators gave low ratings.

Because, as shown in figure 3, individual annotators differed in the distribution of ratings they used, we normalized this by annotator: a sentence is counted as low-adequacy if each annotator gave it a rating in the lower 1/3 of their total adequacy ratings.

The number of low-scoring sentences by system is given in table 3.

All 139 low-adequacy sentences were marked as having at least one adequacy error by at least one annotator.

46 (33%) were tagged by both annotators as incomprehensible, 51 (37%) as missing information, and 25 (18%) as adding information.

Added information is perhaps the most troubling form of error; AMR generation systems will have severely limited potential for use in practical applications as long as they hallucinate meaning.

In one example, a reference to prostitution is inserted:

REF: A high-security Russian laboratory complex storing anthrax, plague and other deadly bacteria faces loosing electricity for lack of payment to the mosenergo electric utility.

RIBEIRO: the russian laboratory complex as a high -security complex will be faced with anthrax , prostitution , and and other killing bacterium losing electricity as it is lack of paying for mosenergo .

As seen in table 2, Manning omits and adds information substantially less often than the other systems, but produces incomprehensible sentences far more often.

Thus, it is unsurprising that most (73%) of its low-adequacy sentences are also low-fluency.

For Guo, too, a majority (54%) of low-adequacy sentences are low-fluency, though this is largely due to anonymization and repetition of words, discussed below.

Using the same procedure described above for low adequacy, we also identify sentences for which both annotators gave low fluency ratings.

Counts for each system are given in table 3.

As expected, no reference sentences are low-fluency.

Of the 116 low-fluency sentences, 50 (43%) are also marked as incomprehensible by both annotators.

The other error types are, unsurprisingly, less related to low fluency than to low adequacy: 23 (20%) of low-fluency sentences are missing information, and only 6 (5%) have added information.

Over half of all low-fluency sentences are from Manning's rule-based system.

This is largely because in many cases the system's rules do not allow for the generation of function words that would be expected in a fluent version of the sentence, while the neural systems are more likely to include such words in similar ways to the training data.

For example, for the following AMR: Manning's system gave the disfluent output 'Thank you read .' while others produced variants of 'thank you for reading .' or 'thanks for reading .'

For the neural systems, common sources of low fluency scores included anonymization and repetition of words.

Anonymization was a problem primarily for Guo; 9 of Guo's 21 low-fluency sentences contain the token <unk> in place of lower-frequency words.

For example, for the AMR in §1, 'annexation' is lost:

GUO: georgia labels russia 's support for the <unk> act .

While Konstas uses anonymization less frequently, 2 of the system's 5 low-fluency sentences contain anonymized location names or quantities.

Guo, Ribeiro, and Konstas all have several low-fluency sentences with unhumanlike repetition of words or phrases, for example: RIBEIRO: and i happen to like a large lot of a lot .