Figure 1 illustrates the overview architecture of the proposed HiStruct+ model.

The model consists of a base TLM for sentence encoding and two stacked inter-sentence Transformer layers for hierarchical learning and extractive summarization.

The sequence on top is the input document, tokenized by the corresponding tokenizer of the involved TLM.

The input embeddings to the TLM are the same as in the original TLM.

In order to represent individual sentences, we insert a BOS token at the start of every sentence.

Only the BOS token embeddings are preserved as the initial sentence representations (S s ).

Each sentence representation is first enriched with a Sentence Linear Position Embedding, which encodes its linear position within the whole document.

An additional Sentence Hierarchical Position Embedding (sHE s ) can be added, which is generated by encoding the hierarchical position of the sentence using the proposed hierarchical position encoding method.

If section titles are available, we can further enrich the sentence representation by adding a STE or classified STE (ST E s ).

The sentence representations with the injected HiStruct information are fed to the two stacked Transformer encoder layers to learn inter-sentence documentlevel hierarchical contextual features.

The result is a set of Hierarchical Contextual Sentence Embed-dings (HS s ).

The final output layer is a sigmoid classifier, which calculates the confidence score ŷs of including the s-th sentence in the extractive summary based on the HS s .

The loss of the summarization model is the binary classification entropy of the prediction ŷs against the gold label y s .

The two HiStruct injection components shaded in light-green are optional.

Removing these from the HiStruct+ model based on BERT, the architecture is identical to BERTSUMEXT (Liu and Lapata, 2019), which is a strong baseline against our models on CNN/DailyMail.

When using RoBERTa and Longformer as the base TLM, we also construct a baseline model without the two components.

The comparison baselines are named as TransformerETS in this paper.

The effectiveness of injecting HiStruct information using the proposed methods can be systematically investigated by comparing our HiStruct+ model to the corresponding TransformerETS baseline which uses the same base TLM and the same input length, but is unaware of the HiStruct information.