Statistical machine translation (SMT) systems are trained on bilingual parallel and monolingual data.

The training corpora typically come from different sources, and vary across topics, genres, dialects, authors' written styles, etc., which are usually referred as "general domain" training data.

Here the word "domain" is often used to indicate some combination of all above and other possible hidden factors (Chen et al., 2013).

At run time, the content to be translated may come from a different domain.

Due to the mismatch in "domains", it is possible to achieve better performance by adapting the SMT system to the test domain (in-domain).

However, manually creating training data to match the test domain is not a preferred solution, because 1) sometimes the test domain is not known when training the model, and it could change from sentence to sentence; 2) even if the test domain is pre-determined, the resources required and slow turnaround in data collection process will still delay the system development process.

Therefore, training data selection is widely used for domain adaptation in statistical machine translation (Zhao et al., 2004;Lü et al., 2007;Yasuda et al., 2008;Moore and Lewis, 2010;Axelrod et al., 2011;Duh et al., 2013;Axelrod et al., 2015).

Data selection techniques select monolingual or bilingual data that are similar to the indomain seed data based on some criteria, which are incorporated into the training data.

The most successful data selection approaches (Moore and Lewis, 2010;Axelrod et al., 2011) train n-gram language models on in-domain text to select similar sentences from the large general-domain corpora according to the cross entropy.

Furthermore, (Duh et al., 2013) obtained some gains by extending these approaches from n-gram models to recurrent neural network language models (Mikolov et al., 2010).

To train the in-domain language model, a reasonable size in-domain data set, which typically includes several thousands of sentences, is required.

In (Axelrod et al., 2011;Duh et al., 2013), the sizes of the in-domain data sets are 30K and over 100K sentences respectively.

However, we do not always have access to large or even medium amounts of in-domain data.

With the growth of social media, new domains have emerged which need machine translation but which have very limited in-domain data, maybe just a few hundred sentence pairs.

What's more, if one wishes to build a large scale topic-specific MT system with hundreds of topics, it is prohibitively expensive to collect tens of thousands of in-domain sentences for each topic.

In this paper, we try to address this challenge, i.e., domain adaptation with very limited amounts of in-domain data.

Inspired by the success of convolutional neural networks applied to image and text classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;Kim, 2014;Johnson and Zhang, 2015a;Johnson and Zhang, 2015b), we propose to use CNN to classify training sentence pairs as in-domain or outof-domain sentences.

To overcome the problem of limited in-domain data, we propose to augment the original model with semi-supervised convolutional neural networks for domain classification.

Convolutional neural networks (LeCun and Bengio, 1998) are feed-forward neural networks that exploit the internal structure of data through convolution layers; each computation unit processes a small region of the input data.

CNN has been very successful on image classification.

When applying it to text input, the convolution layers process small regions of a document, i.e., a sequence of sentences or words.

CNN has been gaining attention, and is now used in many text classification tasks (Kalchbrenner et al., 2014;Zeng et al., 2014;Johnson and Zhang, 2015b;Yin and Schütze, 2015;Wang et al., 2015).

In many of these studies, the first layer of the network converts words to word embeddings using table lookup.

The word embeddings are either trained as part of CNN training, or pre-trained (thus fixed during model training time) on an additional unlabled corpus.

The later is termed semi-supervised CNN.

Given tiny amounts of indomain data, the information learned in these pretrained word embeddings is very helpful.

We use a small amount of in-domain data, such as the development set, as the positive sample and randomly select the same number of sentences from the general-domain training data as the negative sample to form the training sample for training the CNN classification model.

This is a typical supervised learning setting.

To compensate the limit of in-domain data size, we use word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) to learn the word embedding from a large amount of general-domain data.

Together with the labeled data, these word embed-dings are fed to the convolution layer as additional input to train the final classification model.

This is a semi-supervised framework.

The learned models are then used to classify each sentence in the general-domain training data based on their domain relevance score.

The top N sentence pairs are selected to train the SMT system.

We carry out experiments on 4 different language directions with 9-15M sentence pairs in each direction.

The test domains include short message (sms), tweets, and Facebook posts.

The experimental results show that our method is able to select a small amount of training data that is used to create a system which outperforms baseline systems trained with all the general-domain data.

For example, we obtain over 3.1 BLEU improvement on the Chinese-to-English sms task with around 3% of the whole training data.

Experiments also show that we can reduce the size of the in-domain sample to around 100 sentences and still obtain a 2.1 BLEU improvement.

Self-training (Ueffing and Ney, 2007;Schwenk, 2008;Bertoldi and Federico, 2009) uses generaldomain bilingual parallel data and in-domain monolingual data.

An MT system is first trained on bilingual general-domain data, then it is used to translate in-domain monolingual data.

The resulting target sentences or bilingual sentence pairs are then used as additional training data for language model or translation model training.

Some early data selection approaches (Zhao et al., 2004;Lü et al., 2007;Moore and Lewis, 2010) use in-domain monolingual data to select monolingual or bilingual data that are similar to the in-domain data according to some criterion.

The state-of-the-art data selection approaches (Axelrod et al., 2011;Duh et al., 2013;Axelrod et al., 2015) search for bilingual parallel sentences using the difference in language model perplexity between two language models trained on in-domain and out-domain data, respectively.

Data weighting approaches weight each data item according to its relevance to the in-domain data.

Mixture model adaptation (Foster and Kuhn, 2007;Foster et al., 2010;Sennrich, 2012;Foster et al., 2013) assumes that the general-domain data can be clustered to several sub-corpora, with some parts that are not too far from test domain.

It combines sub-models trained on different sub-corpus data sets linearly or log-linearly with different weights.

Vector space model adaptation (Chen et al., 2013) has the same assumption, and it weights each phrase pair based on vector space model (VSM).

(Chen et al., 2014) improved the VSM adaptation by extending it to distributed VSM and grouped VSM.

Instance weighting adopts a rich set of features to compute weights for each instance in the training data; it can be applied to sentence pairs (Matsoukas et al., 2009) or phrase pairs (Foster et al., 2010).

If in-domain comparable data are available, (Daume III and Jagarlamudi, 2011;Irvine et al., 2013) propose mining translations from the comparable data to translate out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words and capture new senses for the new test domains.

(Dou and Knight, 2012;Zhang and Zong, 2013) learn bilingual lexical or phrase tables from in-domain monolingual data with a decipherment method, then incorporate them into the SMT system.

All the above approaches assume that either there is an in-domain (mono-lingual, parallel, or comparable) data set with a reasonable size available, or that some sub-corpora are closer to the test domain than others.

There is no previous work considering the scenario where only a tiny amount of in-domain data is available: this is the scenario we address in this paper.