Existing work on diacritizing Hebrew is not common, and all efforts build on word-level features.

Kontorovich (2001) trains an HMM on a vocalized and morphologically-tagged portion of the Hebrew Bible containing 30,743 words, and evaluates the result on a test set containing 2,852 words, achieving 81% WOR accuracy.

Note that Biblical Hebrew is very different from Modern Hebrew in both vocabulary, grammatical structure, and diacritization, and also has many words with diacritization.

In our system, we exclude the Bible altogether from the training set, as its inclusion actively hurts performance on the validation set, which consists of Modern Hebrew.

Tomer (2012) designs a diacritization system for Hebrew verbs consisting of a combination of a verb inflection system, a syllable boundary detector, and an SVM model for classifying verb inflection paradigms.

The focus on verbs in a type-level setup makes this work incomparable to ours or to others in this survey.

In Arabic, diacritization serves a comparable purpose to that in Hebrew, but not exclusively: most diacritic marks differentiate consonantal phonemes from each other, e.g. /b/ vs. /t/ (which only the sin/shin dot does in Hebrew), whereas vocalization marks are in a one-to-one relationship with their phonetic realizations, e.g. only the fatha as in /ba/ encodes the /a/ vowel.

Dictionary-less Arabic diacritization has been attempted using a 3-layer Bi-LSTM (Belinkov and Glass, 2015).

Abandah et al. (2015) use a Bi-LSTM where characters are assigned either one or more diacritic symbols.

Our system differs from theirs by virtue of separating the diacritization categories.

Mubarak et al. (2019) tackled Arabic diacritization as a sequence-to-sequence problem, tasking the model with reproducing the characters as well as the marks.

Zalmout and Habash (2017) have made the case against RNN-only systems, arguing for the importance of morphological analyzers in Arabic NLP systems.

We concede that well-curated systems may perform better than uncurated ones, particularly on low-resource languages such as Hebrew, but we note that they are difficult to train for individual use cases and are burdensome to incorporate within larger systems.

Diacritics restoration in Latin-based scripts, applicable mostly to European languages, forms a substantially different problem from the one in Hebrew given the highly lexicalized nature of diacritic usage in these languages and the very low rate of characters requiring diacritics.

The state-of-theart systems in such languages employ transformer models in a sequence-to-sequence setup (Náplava et al., 2021;Stankevičius et al., 2022), supplanting character-RNN sequence prediction architectures reminiscent of ours (Náplava et al., 2018).

Indeed, the authors of this latter work note the only non-European in their dataset, Vietnamese, as a special outlier.