We introduce generated knowledge prompting, a simple method to elicit and integrate knowledge from language models so as to improve performance on commonsense reasoning tasks.

In particular, we generate knowledge statements by prompting a language model with task-specific, humanwritten, few-shot demonstrations of questionknowledge pairs.

We show that knowledge can be integrated by simply plugging it in at inference time, with no need to finetune the model for knowledge integration.

Our method shows effectiveness across multiple datasets, sets the new state-of-theart on three commonsense reasoning tasks, and works under a variety of settings.

The method's success highlights language models as sources of flexible, high-quality knowledge for commonsense reasoning.

Table 6 summarizes the comparison between our generated knowledge prompting method and prior methods that add generated text to an inference model for commonsense reasoning tasks.

Our method is unique because it uses few-shot demonstrations to prompt for knowledge generation, and can apply to finetuned inference models without joint finetuning with knowledge.

Table 7 through 10 shows the full prompts for knowledge generation that we use for each evaluated task: NumerSense, CSQA, CSQA2, and QASC.

Table 11 and 12 shows the detailed guidelines we use for human evaluation of generated knowledge.

Limitations.

Our method is tested on a representative selection of commonsense reasoning tasks and datasets.

Applying this method to other tasks may require people with moderate expertise to craft a task-specific prompt to feed into the method.

Risks.

It is possible that our proposed method may lower the performance of commonsense reasoning systems, if not implemented properly or using badly-designed prompts.

Such risk can be mitigated by following the prompt design guidelines in this paper ( §2.1).

We do not train any new model in this paper.

Inference is conducted on Quadro RTX 8000 GPUs and costs about 200 GPU hours in total.

Knowledge generation is done with the OpenAI GPT-3 API, with an approximate cost of $500.

Our method is implemented with PyTorch and the Huggingface Transformers library.

Knowledge Generator Inference Model CAGE (Rajani et al., 2019) task-finetuned joint-finetuned Latcinnik and Berant (2020) task-finetuned joint-finetuned DynaGen (Bosselut et al., 2021) task-finetuned joint-finetuned Self-talk (Shwartz et al., 2020) template-prompted 0-shot Contrastive expl.

(Paranjape et al., 2021) template-prompted 0-shot & joint-finetuned Generated knowledge prompting (ours) demonstrations-prompted 0-shot & task-finetuned Table 6: Comparison of methods that add generated text to an inference model.

Knowledge Generator: taskfinetuned -a model finetuned to generate task-specific knowledge; template-prompted -an off-the-shelf LM from which knowledge statements are elicited via templates; demonstration-prompted -an off-the-shelf LM from which knowledge statements are elicited via few-shot demonstrations ( §2.1).

Inference Model: 0-shot -an off-the-shelf LM that is set up to make predictions; task-finetuned -a model finetuned with task training data (and without seeing extra knowledge); joint-finetuned -a model finetuned with task training data and generated knowledge.