Better performance with more knowledge.

We analyze the impact of the number of generated knowledge statements, M , and show the results in Figure 2.

Generally, the performance increases with the quantity of knowledge statements.

It saturates at M = 20 and begins to decline when more knowledge statements are introduced, which may be because more noisy knowledge is generated.

The knowledge integration method.

In addition to the knowledge integration method described in §2.2, we experiment with two alternatives: Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) and Product-of-Experts (PoE) (Hinton, 2002).

These make the following modifications to Equation 1, respectively:

MoE: p I (a|q, K q ) ∝ 0≤m≤M p I (a|q m ),(2)

PoE: p I (a|q, K q ) ∝ 0≤m≤M p I (a|q m ).

(3)  The results in Table 4 indicate that our knowledge integration method -i.e. adaptively choosing the best knowledge to rely on -is best among the three.

Lightweight inference models and amplification.

We found that the size of inference model affects the magnitude of improvement.

Figure 3 shows the NumerSense performance gain on top of different sizes of inference model.

As we use smaller inference models, the performance gain increases drastically.

In particular, with our method the smallest T5 model is as powerful as the T5-3b baseline, and T5-large outperforms the GPT-3 baseline.

This indicates that model-generated knowledge can enable high performing, yet lightweight, inference models.

Furthermore, the improvement does not diminish as the inference model becomes as big as the knowledge generation model, as the inference by GPT-3 can benefit by 9.0% from the knowledge elicited from itself.

This indicates that our method can somewhat amplify the useful knowledge already possessed by the model, leading to better predictions.

The size of knowledge generation model.

a 5.0% improvement, narrower than the 10.5% improvement given by the 175B knowledge model.

The 1.3B and 0.4B knowledge models do not give a significant improvement.

Therefore, we do not necessarily need the largest version of GPT-3 as the knowledge source, though we do need the model to be relatively large in order to generate useful and reliable knowledge.