Generated Knowledge Prompting For Commonsense Reasoning

Abstract

Introduction

Generated Knowledge Prompting

A multiple-choice commonsense reasoning task involves predicting an answer a ∈ A q given a ques-tion q ∈ Q, where the set of choices A q is finite and can vary by question, and both questions and answers are variable-length text sequences.

Our method answers commonsense questions in two steps.

The first step is knowledge generation, where we use a language model p G (k|q) to generate knowledge statements conditioned on the question:

K q = {k m : k m ∼ p G (k|q), m = 1 . . . M },

where each knowledge statement k m is a variablelength text sequence.

Intuitively, each statement contains information that is helpful for answering the question (e.g. Table 1).

The second step is knowledge integration, where generated knowledge is integrated into the decision process of a language model used for inference, â = arg max a∈Aq p I (a|q, K q )

In contrast, the vanilla setting of using the inference model without knowledge is represented by â = arg max a∈Aq p I (a|q).

Next, we describe the knowledge generation and integration steps in detail.

Knowledge Generation

We generate question-related knowledge statements by prompting a language model.

The prompt consists of an instruction, a few demonstrations that are fixed for each task, and a new-question placeholder.

The demonstrations are human-written, and each consists of a question in the style of the task and a knowledge statement that is helpful for answering this question.

For a given task, we write five demonstrations using the format in Table 2.

We write questions (or select them from the training set, when available) that are representative of When generating knowledge for a new question q, we plug the question into the placeholder, and repeatedly sample generated continuations of this prompt to obtain a set of knowledge statements K q = {k 1 , k 2 , . . . , k M }.

For full prompts on all the tasks we evaluate on, see Appendix A.2.

Knowledge Integration Via Prompting

In the knowledge integration step, we use a language model -called the inference model -to make predictions with each generated knowledge statement, then select the highest-confidence prediction.

Specifically, we use each knowledge statement to prompt the model, forming M knowledgeaugmented questions:

q 0 = q, q 1 = [k 1 ||q], . . . , q M = [k M ||q] where [•||•] denotes text concatenation.

We compute an aggregated score for each answer choice a using the augmented question that best supports it under the inference model:

p I (a|q, K q ) ∝ max 0≤m≤M p I (a|q m ).

(1)

Intuitively, this favors knowledge statements that strongly support one of the choices.

The predicted answer is then,

â = arg max a∈Aq max 0≤m≤M p I (a|q m ),

which is the choice that gets most support from one of the knowledge statements.

This prediction uses a single knowledge statement, which we refer to as the selected knowledge:

k = k m where m = arg max 0≤m≤M max a∈Aq p I (a|q m ).

The inference model may be any existing language model taken off-the-shelf (i.e. zero-shot) or finetuned on the task.

We do not do any further finetuning with knowledge prompting.

Experimental Setup

Datasets And Task Setup

We evaluate our method on four commonsense reasoning datasets which cover a variety of challenges and problem formats.

NumerSense (Lin et al., 2020) consists of numerical statements about common objects and concepts where for each sentence we need to recover a masked number word.

The choices are integers ranging from zero to ten, plus the word no, so the task can be framed as a multiple-choice problem.

Since NumerSense is a diagnostic dataset, we only use zero-shot inference models, which is the current SOTA.

We follow Zhang (2021) who uses the state-of-the-art zero-shot T5 with text-infilling setup and select the choice with highest likelihood on its token(s).

We also implement zero-shot GPT-3 inference, where we plug in each choice to the question and compute the choice probability as the generative probability of the entire sentence, normalized over all the choices.

CommonsenseQA (CSQA) (Talmor et al., 2019) is a 5-way multiple-choice QA dataset about common world scenarios.

We do inference with the zero-shot and finetuned T5 models.

For zero-shot T5, we format the question as text-infilling, and predict the choice with highest sequence-to-sequence language modeling probability.

For finetuned T5 (including UnifiedQA which is SOTA), we use the same setup as Khashabi et al. (2020).

CommonsenseQA 2.0 (CSQA2) (Talmor et al., 2021) is a binary classification dataset where we need to judge whether commonsense statements are true or false.

We only do inference with the finetuned model, due to poor calibration of zero-shot models on this dataset.

We use finetuned Unicorn (Lourie et al., 2021), which is the current SOTA, following the setup in Talmor et al. (2021).

QASC (Khot et al., 2020) is an 8-way multiplechoice QA dataset about grade school science.

This dataset also includes two pieces of background knowledge per question, whose composition fully answers the question.

We do inference with zeroshot T5 and finetuned T5 (including UnifiedQA which is SOTA), using the same setups as CSQA.

Knowledge Generation Baselines

We study the impact of our knowledge generation method (shorthanded as K) by comparing with the following baselines: No knowledge (∅) We refer to inference without any knowledge statements as the vanilla baseline.

Random sentences (R) Sampling random sentences from the language model without conditioning on the question.

We use the same implementation setup as our knowledge generation method (i.e. also using GPT-3, with the same hyperparameters).

Context sentences (C) Sampling sentences from the context of the question.

This is implemented by sampling text continuations of the question from the language model.

We use the same implementation setup as our knowledge generation method.

Template-generated knowledge (T ) Self-talk (Shwartz et al., 2020) uses manually-designed templates to elicit knowledge statements from language models.

For fair comparison, we use GPT-3 as the knowledge generator in self-talk, and bound the number of generations to M = 20 per question.

Templates and other hyperparameters are kept the same as their original paper.

Retrieval-based knowledge (IR) Instead of being generated, knowledge can be retrieved from appropriate sources.

We consider the following retrieval-based methods.

For NumerSense, knowledge is retrieved from sentences in Wikipedia and GenericsKB.

For CSQA2, we use snippets returned by Google when querying the question.

For QASC, we use the associated fact sentences that are used to create each question.

Answers (A) Instead of generating knowledge, GPT-3 can be prompted to generate direct answers to questions.

In the prompts, we use the same input questions as those in knowledge generation, while replacing the knowledge statement with the ground truth answer.

We consider two baselines:

(1) Generate one answer per question and use this to measure the performance of the few-shot GPT-3 inference model; (2) Generate M = 20 answers per question, and use these answers to prompt the SOTA inference models.

Experimental Results

Overall Performance

Table 3 shows the results on zero-shot and finetuned models following our task setups.

New state-of-the-art.

We apply our method on top of the same inference model used in the previous state-of-the-art.

On NumerSense, we achieve a  3 indicate that our method consistently improves upon the vanilla baseline set by finetuned inference models (though by smaller margins than in the zero-shot settings).

Knowledge Generation Methods

Analysis

Human Evaluation

Qualitative Examples

Table 5 shows a few examples where the generated knowledge rectifies model prediction.

Due to space constraints we only show the selected knowledge ( §2.2) for each question.

In all examples, the model without prompted knowledge assigns a higher score to an incorrect answer than the correct answer, while with knowledge prompting, the correct answer is assigned a much higher score.

Prompting with generated knowledge can transform commonsense reasoning into explicit reasoning procedures such as paraphrasing, induction, deduction, analogy, abductive reasoning, logical elimination, negation, and numerical reasoning.

Table 5: More examples where prompting with generated knowledge reduces the reasoning type and rectifies the prediction.

The first row of each section is the original question and the inference results associated with it; the second row is a model-generated knowledge statement that prompts the inference model.

We show correct answers in green, incorrect answers in red, and their corresponding scores assigned by the inference model.

Related Work

Conclusion

Figure 2: Performance with different number of generated knowledge statements per question (QASC dev set, T5-11b inference model).

Figure 3: Improvement on top of different sizes of inference model (Numersense dev set).

Figure 4: Improvement by different sizes of knowledge generation model (Numersense dev set, T5-11b inference model).

Figure  4shows the NumerSense performance gain when using different sizes of GPT-3 as the knowledge generation model.

On top of the T5-11b inference model, The 6.7B knowledge model gives

Figure 5: Human evaluation of generated knowledge.

Left: Percentage of good knowledge statements along each axis.

Right: Agreement between human and machine on helpfulness of selected knowledge.

Birds have two wings.

Penguin is a kind of bird.

Knowledge: Clouds are made of water vapor.

Experimental results of applying different knowledge generation methods on various tasks and inference models.

T5-11b is the zero-shot inference model, whereas other inference models are finetuned based on T5-11b.

We bold the best and underline the second best numbers.

Previous SOTA and retrieval-based methods are also based on the inference model in their corresponding column: * T5-11b 1.1 +digits (Submission by ISI Waltham);