Histruct+: Improving Extractive Text Summarization With Hierarchical Structure Information

Abstract

Introduction

Related Work

Text Summarization

Extractive Text Summarization (ETS) is to classify sentences within a document with labels indicating whether a sentence should be included in the summary.

Liu and Lapata (2019) fine-tune BERT with stacked Transformer layers and a sigmoid classifier (BERTSUMEXT).

Instead of directly utilizing the existing Transformer encoder for document encoding, Zhang et al. (2019) pre-train a hierarchical Transformer encoder consisting of a sentence encoder and a document encoder (HIBERT) and fine-tune it for ETS.

For long documents, Xiao and Carenini (2019) propose a RNN-based ETS model incorporating both the global and the local context (ExtSum-LG).

To address the problem of redundancy in extractive summaries, the authors fur-ther improve their work by introducing redundancy reduction (Xiao and Carenini, 2020).

They systematically explore and compare different methods including Trigram Blocking (Paulus et al., 2018), RdLoss, MMR-Select and MMR-Select+ (Xiao and Carenini, 2020).

Trigram Blocking is a traditional redundancy reduction method that avoids adding a candidate sentence to the summary if it has trigram overlap with the previously selected sentences.

Their previous model combined with the redundancy reduction methods produce SOTA performance for ETS on PubMed and arXiv (Xiao and Carenini, 2020).

Previous works on extractive summarization model hierarchical structure of documents by introducing a hierarchical attention, where they first learn contextual token representations based on the linear dependencies between tokens and then add additional CNN (Cheng and Lapata, 2016) or RNN (Nallapati et al., 2017) or Transformer (Zhang et al., 2019;Liu and Lapata, 2019) layer(s) to learn document-level representations for each sentence based on the linear dependencies between sentences.

However, they learn hierarchical representations of sentences in an implicit way.

The models are like black boxes, lacking interpretability.

In contrast, our proposed approach enriches sentence representations in an explicit way by using section titles and hierarchical positions of sentences as additional HiStruct information, which is more intuitive and interpretable.

Abstractive text summarization (ATS) is to generate summaries with new sentences which are not present in the source text.

BERTSUMABS (Liu and Lapata, 2019) uses the pre-trained BERT as the encoder in its encoder-decoder architecture.

Instead of simply using the pre-trained BERT, recent works, including T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), BART (Lewis et al., 2020) and PEGAUSUS (Zhang et al., 2020) pre-train encoder-decoder models specifically for seq2seq tasks.

The first attempt at addressing neural abstractive summarization of long documents is undertaken by Cohan et al. (2018).

Aksenov et al. (2020) overcome the length limitations of BERT by a new method of BERT-windowing, allowing it to deal with longer documents.

Gidiotis and Tsoumakas (2020) propose a divide-andconquer approach to train a model to summarize each part of the document separately.

To address the essential issue of the quadratic full attention operation of TLMs, Zaheer et al. (2020) propose BigBird with a sparse attention mechanism.

Hybrid text summarization combines extractive summarization, abstractive summarization, or other techniques as a two-stage hybrid system.

MatchSum (Zhong et al., 2020) is a recent work that first selects sentences from a document using an extractive model and builds a set of candidate summaries based on them.

The summarization task is then formulated as a semantic text matching problem between the source document and the candidate summaries.

Pilault et al. (2020) presents a hybrid system that consists of an extractive model and a Transformer language model.

The Transformer language model employs an encoder-decoder architecture for abstractive summarization, conditioned on the sentences extracted by the extractive model.

Injection Of Additional Information

The idea of injecting additional information to TLM is inspired by two former works, LAMBERT (Garncarek et al., 2020) and LayoutLM (Xu et al., 2020), where the visual layout information is injected into BERT by adjusting its input embeddings.

These models were not proposed for text summarization and they cannot be applied to plain texts since the layout positions have to be obtained from scanned document images.

In contrast, our approach makes use of the internal HiStruct information, which can be found in most types of textual data.

Moreover, we enrich the output representations from the TLM instead of adjusting the input embeddings.

This saves compute resources since TLM pre-training is not required.

Methodology

Hierarchical Structure Information

Hierarchical position of a sentence is represented in the proposed method as a vector of its positions at each hierarchy-level.

SSV s = (a s , b s ) (1)

Given the s-th sentence within a document, its hierarchical position is formulated as a 2-dimensional vector (a s , b s ), denoted as the sentence structure vector SSV s , where a s represents the linear position of the section containing the sentence and b s is the linear position of the sentence within the section.

All sentences within the same section have the same value in the first dimension of the SSV, indicating the close relationships between them.

The second dimension indicates more precisely their linear relations within the section.

By this very simple numerical formulation, hierarchical relations between sentences are clearly identified.

Section titles exist in particular in long documents like scientific papers.

They usually imply the section content and describe the common topic for its sub-sentences (Ostendorff et al., 2020).

In our work, we propose to utilize the corresponding section title as an additional HiStruct information when encoding its sub-sentences.

There exist typical section titles in scientific papers.

Similar section titles like "Conclusion", "Conclusions" and "Concluding remarks" have the same semantic meaning and can be grouped into one typical section title class of "Conclusions".

This is also taken into consideration when encoding the section titles.

Hierarchical Structure Encoding

Hierarchical position embedding is based on the existing linear position encoding methods (PE), including the sinusoidal method (sin) used by Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and the learnable method (la) used by BERT (Devlin et al., 2019).

We use one of the PEs to encode the two dimensions of a SSV respectively, resulting in two embeddings.

Using the la PE, the embeddings are initialized randomly and trained with the entire summarization model.

Using the sin PE, the two embeddings are calculated simply by Equations 2 and 3 as described by Vaswani et al. (2017).

P E (pos,2i) = sin(pos/10000 2i/d model ) (2) P E (pos,2i+1) = cos(pos/10000 2i/d model ) (3)

where pos is the value in one dimension of the SSV and i is the i-th dimension of the resulting embedding.

Given the s-th sentence with the hierarchical position of (a s , b s ), and the desired size of the output embeddings d, the Sentence Hierarchical Position Embedding (sHE) can be generated by Equations 4, 5, 6, using different combination modes.

sHEsum(s, d) = P E(as, d) + P E(bs, d) (4) sHEmean(s, d) = P E(as, d) + P E(bs, d) 2 (5) sHE concat (s, d) = P E(as, d 2 )|P E(bs, d 2 ) (6)

where the symbol | denotes vector concatenation.

Using one of the PEs (i. e., sin or la) associated with one of the combination modes (i. e., sum, mean or concat), it totals six different settings of the hierarchical position encoding method: sinsum, sin-mean, sin-concat, la-sum, la-mean and la-concat.

(Classified) section title embedding is generated by the same pre-trained TLM, which is involved in the summarization model.

We have two options to encode section titles: section title embedding (STE) and classified section title embedding (classified STE).

A section title embedding is generated by feeding the tokenized section title into the TLM and summing up the last hidden states at each token position as a single embedding.

Similar section titles consisting of similar tokens lead to embeddings that are already similar to each other in some way.

We also manually pre-define typical section title classes and the corresponding intraclass section titles depending on the datasets and the domains.

Using the classified STE, all intraclass STEs are replaced with the embedding of its corresponding class.

In the case that a section title does not belong to any class or it falls into more than one class, the original STE is used.

Model Architecture

Experimental Setup

Datasets

Our models are evaluated on three benchmark datasets for single document summarization, including CNN/DailyMail (See et al., 2017), PubMed and arXiv (Cohan et al., 2018).

Table 4 presents detailed statistics of the datasets.

The three datasets represent different document types ranging from short news articles to long scientific papers.

To emphasize the difference in the hierarchical structure among different datasets, we define the concepts of hierarchical depth (hi-depth) and hierarchical width (hi-width).

The hi-depth refers to the number of the hierarchy-levels within the document.

Scientific papers have a deeper hierarchy consisting of sections, paragraphs, sentences and tokens (i. e., hi-depth = 4).

In news articles, paragraphs are not further grouped into sections (i. e., hi-depth = 3).

In this case, we use paragraphs instead of sections as the highest hierarchy level when representing the hierarchical position of sentences (i. e., the first dimension of the SSVs).

The hierarchical width, hi-width = N s N hsh , is the ratio of total number of sentences N s and the number of the text-units regarding the highest structure hierarchy N hsh .

It indicates how many sentences are there on average in every paragraph/section.

The more sentences are there, the second dimension of the SSVs has a more wide range of values, and the values in the first dimension of the SSVs differ a lot from the linear sentence positions.

Larger hi-depth and larger hi-width indicate that the hierarchical structure of the dataset is more conspicuous.

We hypothesize that the proposed method works better on datasets with more conspicuous hierarchical structures, where hi-depth and hi-width are larger.

This will be proved by comparing the performance improvements on the three datasets with different hierarchical characteristics.

CNN/DailyMail is included as an exemplary dataset with less conspicuous hierarchical structure compared to PubMed and arXiv.

The average hi-width over all documents is 1.33, which is much smaller than those in PubMed and arXiv.

The dataset contains more than 310k news articles.

We use the standard splits given by See et al. (2017) for training, validation, and testing.

During data preprocessing, we first split documents into sentences and paragraphs respectively with the Stanford CoreNLP toolkit (Manning et al., 2014).

The sentences and paragraphs are tokenized, resulting in the lists of sentence tokens and the lists of paragraph tokens.

SSVs corresponding to each sentence can be obtained by comparing those lists side by side.

For all three datasets, we use a greedy selection algorithm similar to Nallapati et al. (2017) and Liu and Lapata (2019) to select sentences from documents as the gold extractive summaries (OR-ACLE).

Sentences in the ORACLE summaries are assigned with the gold label 1.

PubMed and arXiv contain longer scientific papers.

PubMed contains papers in the bio-medical domain, while arXiv contains papers in various domains.

The average hi-width over all PubMed documents is 15.79, in arXiv it is 37.33.

We use the original splits given by Cohan et al. (2018) for training, validation, and testing.

SSVs are obtained by tokenizing the sentences and sections of every document respectively.

The details on the generation of section title embeddings and classified section title embeddings can be found in Appendix A.2.

Implementation Details

We implement our model based on BERTSUMEXT (Liu and Lapata, 2019) and use HuggingFace Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) to make use of the pretrained instances of BERT, RoBERTa and Longformer.

On CNN/DailyMail, we select 3 sentences with Trigram Blocking.

On PubMed and arXiv, 7 sentences are extracted while Trigram Blocking is not applied (see more details with regard to implementation in Appendix A.3 and A.4).

Results And Discussion

Results On Cnn/Dailymail

Results On Pubmed

Results On Arxiv

Conclusions

Figure 1: Architecture of the HiStruct+ model.

The model consists of a base TLM for sentence encoding and two stacked inter-sentence Transformer layers for hierarchical contextual learning with a sigmoid classifier for extractive summarization.

The two blocks shaded in light-green are the HiStruct injection components.

Figure 2: Proportions of the extracted sentences at each linear position.

The x-axis values are linear sentence indices, the y-axis values are percentages of the extracted sentences.

In this figure, only the first 25 sentence indices are included due to space limitation.

tHEsum(t, d) = P E(at, d) + P E(bt, d) + P E(ct, d) (8) tHEmean(t, d) = P E(at, d) + P E(bt, d) + P E(ct, d)

Figure3: Two samples for human evaluation and case analysis of the extractive summaries predicted by the HiStruct+ model and the baseline model, in comparison with the gold summary (i.e., the abstract of the paper).

The first sample is selected from the arXiv dataset, while the second sample is from PubMed.

Top-7 sentences with the highest predicted scores are extracted, and then combined in their original order to construct a final summary.

Their linear indices within the original document are shown in the second row of each table.

The texts highlighted in yellow are the key words and the main content that appear in the gold summary.

The phrases highlighted in green indicate typical parts of a scientific paper such as summary and future work.

Sentences are split by '<q>'.

F1 ROUGE results on arXiv.

Bold are the scores of the HiStruct+ models that are better than the corresponding TransformerETS baseline.

The symbol * indicates that the corresponding SOTA ROUGE for extractive summarization is improved by our model.

Statistics of the datasets. * avg.

#paragraphs in CNN/DailyMail.

Table 6 and Table7respectively.

The detailed model architectures and experimental settings include:Base TLM: the Transformer language model used for sentence encoding in the summarization system.

Input length: how many tokens are taken as input.

the numbers of the learned position embeddings for each hierarchy-level of the hierarchical positions and the linear sentence positions, when using the learnable position encoding method.

We set them to a same value during training.

SS: saving steps, save checkpoints every k steps.

n: select n sentences as the extractive summary for each document.

TB: trigram blocking, whether to apply Trigram Blocking during sentence selection A.5 Ablation Studies on CNN/DailyMail