In order to contextualise the numbers reported in Tables 1 and2  present the highlights in this section.

Readers interested in language-specific analysis (including many more examples) are encouraged to read Appendix A.1.

We focused on errors committed by CrossAligner and XeroAlign IO , which achieved the best individual and combined scores.

We sampled 100 random errors from each of the following settings: Hindi, French and German from MTOP, Portuguese, Chinese and Spanish from M-ATIS and Thai from MTOD for a diverse pool of errors.

The authors adjudicated with native speakers to categorise mistakes into the following types.

Error Types We discovered two main sources of mistakes: A boundary error occurs when the model predicts more or fewer entity words/tokens than given in the gold annotation.

A semantics error occurs when the wrong entity class/type is predicted.

Models can therefore commit: 1) both errors resulting in Poor Transfer, 2) a boundary error without a semantic error and vice versa giving us a Partial Transfer or 3) neither error (a false negative), which we deemed an Acceptable Transfer.

We report individual and average error occurrences as well as transfer type percentages in Table 3.

Poor Transfer indicates that the prediction error is too serious and unusable (even misleading) in a real-world personal assistant.

This is typically due to both a boundary and a semantics error, however, some mistakes can be serious enough alone to result in poor transfer.

For example, a boundary error can cause the retrieved name of a dish, person or a location to be incomplete and therefore invalid.

A semantics error that classifies '10 secondes' (French) as 'date_time' instead of 'mu-sic_rewind_time' would elicit the wrong agent response thus is unusable.

On average, ∼28% of mistakes fall into the 'Poor Transfer' category.

Partial Transfer is defined as either a boundary or a semantics error where neither is considered a serious problem.

Such entities could be made usable in a personal assistant application with simple post-processing rules.

Around 33 percent of errors were deemed to be partially correct.

Often, this was due to including some adjacent punctuation or an article/preposition as part of the entity or a slightly shorter/longer news headline even though a search engine query with that string would have returned the relevant article.

Entities such as '24 minat ka' (Hindi) versus '24 minat' (24 minutes) exemplify the fact that a disputed entity boundary is the most frequent source of error in this category.

On the semantics side, we considered a location partially correct if 'state_name' instead of 'city_name' (for Washington D.C.) was predicted, a location was expected and the boundary was accurate.

These examples are 'errors' we considered correct and usable 'as is' because neither the entity boundary nor its semantics were thought to be wrong.

On average, we deemed almost 39% of entities acceptable for a realworld personal assistant application with around half of those being down to annotation problems (labels missing or incorrect).

In other cases, we accepted predictions that offered a valid alternative e.g. when both 'me' (French) and 'je' (I/me) are present in the user utterance and both refer to the same 'person_reminded'.

Valid alternatives were predicted but annotated somewhat differently.

For example, when the entity boundary was slightly wider 'de ida e volta' (Portuguese) instead of 'ida e volta' (round trip) where both entities are correct.

Similarly, classifying 'salmon' as an ingredient rather than a dish (when 'salmon' is an object of 'prepare') was considered an acceptable transfer.

While the intent classification task is transferred well in a cross-lingual setting, performing better than training on labelled data, our SOTA slot recog-nition F-Score is almost 7 points behind Target Language.

We think there are several factors involved.

Articles, some prepositions, conjunctions, determiners and/or possessives do not transfer easily and may largely be ignored by the XLM as they don't carry important sentence level (e.g. intent) semantics.

English is not ideal as a cross-lingual pivot for many of the dozens of languages covered by the XLM as elements of culture and vernacular that may not have a direct English equivalent don't transfer easily in a zero-shot setting.

Aligning on the most well-resourced language in the same family should help (Xia et al., 2021).

The limits of machine translation, especially for lowresource languages (Mager et al., 2021), can further inhibit alignment methods that leverage parallel data.

Inconsistency of annotation (intra-language and inter-language) is a source of errors when the key concepts are learnt in one language and evaluated (sometimes unreliably) in the target language.

Finally, there were no substantial qualitative differences between XeroAlign IO and CrossAligner in our error analysis suggesting that the aforementioned error patterns may be a feature of the XLM model itself, the nature of the datasets or some as yet unknown confounding variable rather than the choice of the alignment method.