Several approaches to zero-shot cross-lingual transfer exist and can broadly be divided into: a) Databased Transfer, which focuses on training data transformation and b) Model-based Transfer that centres around modifying models' training routine.

Data-based Transfer Translating utterances for the intent classification task is relatively straightforward so previous works focused on projecting and/or aligning the entity labels between translated utterances.

This is followed by standard supervised training with those pseudo-labels and is commonly known as the translate-train method.

One of the earliest works still being used for this purpose is fastalign (Dyer et al., 2013).

It's an unsupervised word aligner trained on a parallel corpus to map each word (thus its entity label) in the source utterance to the word(s) in the target user utterance.

Projecting the entity labels can also be done with word-by-word translation and source label copying (Yi and Cheng, 2021).

A teacher model then weakly labels the target data, which is used to train the final student model.

Sometimes, this type of label projection is complemented with an additional entity alignment step (Li et al., 2021a).

Better performance can be achieved by using machine translation with entity matching and distributional statistics (Jain et al., 2019) though this can be a costly process for each language.

A category of 'word substitution' methods such as code-switching (Qin et al., 2020;Kuwanto et al., 2021) or dictionaryenhanced pretraining (Chaudhary et al., 2020) have also been shown to improve cross-lingual transfer.

Model-based Transfer Prior to the adoption of multilingual transformers (Lample and Conneau, 2019), task-oriented XNLU methods employed a BiLSTM encoder combined with different multilingual embeddings (Schuster et al., 2019).

Newer approaches usually involve a pretrained XLM and the addition of some new training component(s) with the inference routine remaining mostly unchanged.

Xu et al. (2020) learn to jointly align and predict entity labels by fusing the source and target language embeddings with attention and using the resulting cross-lingual representation for entity prediction.

Qi and Du (2020) include an adversarial language detector in training whose loss encourages the model to generate language-agnostic sentence representations for improved zero-shot transfer.

Pan et al. (2020) and Chi et al. (2020) added a contrastive loss to pretraining that treats translated sentences as positive examples and unrelated sentences as negative samples.

This training step helps the XLM produce similar embeddings in different languages.

However, these methods require large annotated datasets and expensive model pretraining (Chi et al., 2020).

Our proposed methods only use the English task data (which is relatively limited) and its translations for each language.

The most related prior works are Arivazhagan et al. (2019) for machine translation and Gritta and Iacobacci (2021) for task-oriented XNLU.

Both of these are cross-lingual alignment methods that use translated training data to zero-shot transfer the source language model to the target language.

We focus on the latter work, called XeroAlign, which reported the most recent SOTA scores on our evaluation datasets.

XeroAlign works by generating a sentence embedding of the user utterance for each language, e.g. English (source) and Thai (target) using the CLS token of the XLM.

A Mean Squared Error loss function minimises the difference between the multilingual sentence embeddings and is backpropagated along with the main task loss.

XeroAlign aims to bring sentence embeddings in different languages closer together with a bias towards intent classification due to the CLS embedding, which is the standard input to the intent classifier.

We reproduce this method for analysis and comparisons but add a small post-processing step that distinctly improves the reported scores.