Here we examine the predictions of the best performing model, hypo2path rev, on the validation set for nouns in WN18RR-hp (647 synsets).

Path Validity Regardless of whether the predicted direct hypernym was correct or not, we observe that every generated path, from each predicted hypernym to the root, is actually a valid path in WordNet.

This is not surprising, since all such paths appear in the training data.

While the model always correctly generated valid paths in the graph, they did not necessarily start at the correct node (i.e., failing to predict the gold direct hypernym).

Nearby Nodes For noun hypernymy, 14.4% of the errors are due to predicting an indirect hypernym (Table 7).

The remaining incorrect predictions are not on the path from the hyponym to the root: these include co-hyponyms ("siblings", or nodes that share the same parent), and "cousins" (nodes that share the same non-parent ancestor).

3.6% of incorrect predictions are co-hyponyms (also in Table 7).

About half of all predicted cousins had a common ancestor with the query hyponym that was within four steps.

Similar Synset Embeddings Some synsets were similar enough to mislead the model: polysemous lemmas were shared across different synsets (17.4% of the total errors) and some multi-word lemmas had shared words (15.4%) (Table 7).

In these cases, the model incorrectly returned a hypernym of a "confounding hyponym" that has a similar representation to the query.

This type of error is attributable to the way synset embeddings are computed (i.e., averaging lemma vectors) which we adopted from Pinter & Eisenstein (2018).

Lemma Overlap and Polysemy Although none of the queries (synsets) are shared between the training and evaluation (validation/test) sets, some lemma-level overlaps exist (5.4% of training set overlaps with the validation set).

We checked whether our model is taking advantage of any lemma overlap by computing the correlation between prediction correctness and lemma overlap rate (i.e., how many lemmas of a query hyponym synset are already seen anywhere in the training set) of each predicted pair in the validation set.

If the correlation is positive, this indicates that the the model did get some hints from lemmas seen from training set.

However, we observed a significant negative correlation (-0.228; p-value<0.001).

This is related to the point on polysemy discussed above.

In nearly half of the validation instances where a query had a lemma overlap with the training set, the model incorrectly predicted the hypernym of a confounding hypernym.

Rare Synsets Is hypernym prediction more difficult for infrequent synsets (i.e., synsets whose lemmas rarely appear in the corpus from which the word vectors were derived)?

We define a synset's frequency as the average of the frequencies of its lemmas.

18We find that the 164 synsets with frequency under 2,000 have an H@1 score of 15.2 (an 8.4 point drop).

To further quantify the effect of synset frequency on performance, we ranked and binned every prediction by synset frequency (Figure 1).

There is a clear upward trend, suggesting that methods designed to learn better embeddings with sparse data (Herbelot and Baroni, 2017) could improve performance substantially.

Figure 1: H@1 for hyponyms of different frequency within equal-sized bins of size 108.