Natural language corpora, such as biomedical research papers (Leaman and Lu, 2016), news articles (Milne and Witten, 2008;Hoffart et al., 2011), and, more generally, web page text (Gabrilovich et al., 2013;Lazic et al., 2015a), often contain ambiguous mentions of entities.

Resolving this ambiguity requires mentions to either be linked to a knowledge base (KB) of entities or discovered as a new KB concept if no suitable entry exists.

Grounded entity mentions are beneficial for tasks such as question-answering (Das et al., 2019), semantic search (Leaman and Lu, 2016), recommendation ranking (Noia et al., 2016), and KB construction (Ling et al., 2015).

The task is made particularly challenging in zero-shot settings, where not every entity has labeled training data (Lin et al., 2017;Logeswaran et al., 2019).

In such settings, a common approach is to make use of entity descriptions, types, and aliases to form entity representations, which can then be used for making predictions.

Learned vector representations of entity mentions are an integral part of modern linking systems (Gillick et al., 2019;Wu et al., 2020, inter alia).

These representations are used for (a) retrieving a short-list of entity candidates for a mention to use with a re-ranker (Wu et al., 2020), (b) making linking predictions directly (Zhang et al., 2021;Liu et al., 2020;Sung et al., 2020), and (c) performing coreference by clustering mentions to form entities (Logan IV et al., 2020).

In this work, we present a new objective and training procedure for learning mention and entity representations that explicitly model mention coreference relationships.

Our proposed method uses a supervised clustering training objective based on forming a directed minimum spanning tree, or arborescence, over mentions and entities.

We hypothesize that such coreference links provide a useful inductive bias because the two tasks are inherently related (Angell et al., 2021;FitzGerald et al., 2021).

We thoroughly analyze the performance of the proposed procedure in each of the aforementioned use cases on MedMentions (Mohan and Li, 2019) and ZeShEL (Logeswaran et al., 2019), two challenging datasets that require zero-shot generalization at inference.

We illustrate that our approach yields mention and entity representations useful for candidate retrieval.

We show improvements over baselines that use similarly parameterized models, achieving gains of at least 7.94 and 0.93 points in recall@64 over two standard dualencoder training procedures on MedMentions and ZeShEL, respectively.

We also consider the linking capacity of our learned embeddings without re-ranking and find that their performance (i.e re-call@1) indeed improves upon our baselines.

Our best performing models show gains of 13.61 & 15.46 points in linking accuracy on MedMentions and 12.06 & 1.52 points on ZeShEL.

Linking Predictions We further consider the improvement in downstream training of full crossattention re-ranker models using higher quality candidates generated by our approach.

We show consistent gains in linking accuracy on MedMentions, setting a new state-of-the-art with a 1.63 point gain over the previous best model.

We also note that our proposed approach shows mixed results on ZeShEL, with one variant outperforming all compared models by at least 1.19 points, while the other two underperform the baselines.

We analyze this behavior in a later section and discuss the characteristics of the data distribution sufficient to make our approach effective.

Cross-Document Coreference Finally, we illustrate that the learned representations can be used to perform coreference of mentions across documents.

This indicates that our approach could be used to discover entities in settings where there is limited or no existing knowledge base of entities.