Finally, we use QUIP for zero-shot binary sentiment analysis.

We reduce sentiment analysis to QA by writing a pair of questions that ask for a reason why an item is good or bad (e.g., "Why is this movie [good/bad]?").

We predict the label whose corresponding question has higher similarity with the QUIP representation of some token in the input.

This prompting strategy has the additional benefit of extracting rationales, namely the span that the QUIP model predicts as the answer to the question.

While we focus on sentiment analysis, extractive rationales have been used for a wide range of NLP tasks (DeYoung et al., 2020), suggesting that this method could be applied more broadly.

More formally, let x be an input sentence and (q 0 , q 1 ) be a pair of questions (i.e., a prompt).

For label y ∈ {0, 1}, we compute a score for y as

S(x, y) = max i r(x) ⊤ i f start (q y )+ max i r(x) ⊤ i f end (q y ). (4

)

This formula is a straightforward way to measure the extent to which some span in x looks like the answer to the question q y , based on the model's pre-trained ability to perform QA.

We predict whichever y has the higher value of S(x, y) -C y , where C y is a calibration constant that offsets the model's bias towards answering q 0 or q 1 .

Our inclusion of C y is inspired by Zhao et al. (2021), who recommend calibrating zero-shot and few-shot models with a baseline derived from content-free inputs to account for biases towards a particular label.

To choose C y , we obtain a list W of the ten most frequent English words, all of which convey no sentiment, and define C y as the mean over w ∈ W of S(w, y), i.e., the score when using w as the input sentence (see Appendix A.4).

This method can succeed only if the model produces a lower score for unanswerable questions than answerable ones.

For example, if the input passage is positive, the model must produce a lower score for "Why is it bad?", which not answerable (as the question contains a presupposition failure), than "Why is it good?", which presumably can be answered from the passage.

We hypothesize that QUIP will indeed recognize that unanswerable questions should receive lower scores, as it is trained to make each span's representation far away from those of questions it does not answer.

In contrast, the cross-encoder objective does not teach the model how to handle unanswerable questions.

To confirm the importance of all three stages of our pre-training pipeline, we compare with a number of baselines and ablations.

No question generation.

We train the bi-encoder model directly on the MRQA training data ("Biencoder + MRQA").

We also include the crossencoder teacher model trained on MRQA as a baseline ("Cross-encoder + MRQA").

These settings mirror standard intermediate task training (Phang et al., 2018;Pruksachatkun et al., 2020).

No teacher.

We train the bi-encoder using the answer generated by the question generation model ("QUIP, no teacher").

If the generated answer is not a span in the passage, we consider the question unanswerable and treat the span containing the CLS token as the answer, as in Devlin et al. (2019).

Cross-encoder self-training.

To test whether the bottleneck imposed by the bi-encoder architecture is crucial for QUIP, we also train a crossencoder model on our generated data ("QUIP, cross-encoder student").

Since this student model has the same architecture as the teacher model, we train it to match the teacher's argmax predictions, a standard self-training objective (Lee, 2013;Kumar et al., 2020).

Training is much less efficient for the cross-encoder than the bi-encoder, since batching questions about the same passage together does not speed up training, so we train for a comparable number of GPU-hours (60 hours on 8 V100 GPUs).

Unsupervised QA.

We test whether QUIP requires real QA data, or if a rough approximation suffices.

We thus train a bi-encoder on 80 million pseudo-questions generated by applying noise to sentences ("Bi-encoder + UnsupervisedQA"), as in Lewis et al. (2019).

Table 5 shows zero-shot accuracy on our three sentiment analysis datasets.

We compare with zeroshot results for LM-BFF (Gao et al., 2021)  6 and reported zero-shot results from Zhao et al. (2021) using GPT-3 with Contextual Calibration (CC) on SST-2.

QUIP using an average prompt outperforms zero-shot LM-BFF by 5.4 points, averaged across the three datasets.

Choosing the best prompt on SST-2 and using that for all datasets improves results not only on SST-2 but also MR, and maintains average accuracy on CR.

Using the cross-encoder student QA model with the same prompts leads to worse performance: we hypothesize that the biencoder succeeds due to its better handling of unanswerable questions.

Overall, these results show that question answering can provide a viable interface for building models that perform non-QA tasks.

Table 6 shows rationales extracted from random SST-2 examples for which QUIP was correct with the best prompt for SST-2 ("What is the reason this movie is [good/bad]?").

To prefer shorter rationales, we extract the highest-scoring span of five BPE tokens or less.

The model often identifies phrases that convey clear sentiment.

Appendix A.10 shows full examples and rationales.

We experimented with some design decisions that did not materially affect our results.

Appendix A.6 shows results for three such choices: including inbatch negative passages (Lee et al., 2021), using the argmax prediction of the teacher rather than soft labels, and using beam search to generate a diverse set of answers followed by one high-likelihood question per answer.

We take these findings as evidence that our basic recipe is stable to many small changes.

For question generation, we hypothesize that the objective of matching the cross-encoder teacher model encourages the bi-encoder to learn important features identified by the cross-encoder, even on questions that are not entirely well-formed.

Table 5: Zero-shot accuracy on sentiment analysis.

Third and fourth rows show mean accuracy across six prompts (standard error in subscripts).

QUIP with an average prompt outperforms prior work; using the best prompt on SST-2 helps on all datasets.

Label Rationale -"too slim", "stale", "every idea", "wore out its welcome", "unpleasant viewing experience", "lifeless", "plot", "amateurishly assembled", "10 times their natural size", "wrong turn" + "packed with information and impressions", "slash-and-hack", "tightly organized efficiency", "passion and talent", "best films", "surprises", "great summer fun", "play equally well", "convictions", "wickedly subversive bent"

Table 6: Rationales extracted by QUIP on ten random examples for each label from SST-2.