Question Answering Infused Pre-Training Of General-Purpose Contextualized Representations

Abstract

Introduction

Qa Infused Pre-Training

QA Infused Pre-training (QUIP) involves pretraining contextual representations with a biencoder extractive QA objective.

In contrast with masked language modeling, QUIP's training objective directly encourages contextual representations to encode useful semantic information, namely information about what questions can be answered by each span.

In contrast with a cross-encoder QA model, QUIP's bi-encoder is trained to encode single passages rather than passage-question pairs, making it more transferable to tasks involving single passages.

Moreover, QUIP learns to push each phrase's representation far away from those of questions the phrase does not answer; this ability to represent unanswerability is crucial for correctly handling some question-based prompts.

We now introduce some basic notation ( §2.1), then describe the QUIP pipeline, which consists of three steps: question generation ( §2.2), crossencoder teacher re-labeling ( §2.3), and bi-encoder training ( §2.4).

Notation

All models operate on sequences of tokens x = [x 1 , . . . , x L ] of length L. By convention, we assume that x 1 is always the special beginning-ofsequence token.

We learn an encoder r that maps inputs x to outputs r(x) = [r(x) 1 , . . . , r(x) L ] where each r(x) i ∈ R d for some fixed dimension d. We call r(x) i the contextual representation of the i-th token in x.

In extractive question answering, a model is given a context passage c and question q, and must output a span of c that answers the question.

Typically, models independently predict probability distributions p(a start | c, q) and p(a end | c, q) over the answer start index a start and end index a end .

Question Generation

Question generation model.

We train a BARTlarge model (Lewis et al., 2020) to generate question-answer pairs given context passages.

The model receives the passage as context and must generate the answer text, then a special separator token, then the question.

This approach is simpler than prior approaches that use separate models for answer and question generation (Lewis and Fan, 2019;Alberti et al., 2019;Puri et al., 2020), and works well in practice.

Training data.

We train on the training data from the MRQA 2019 Shared Task (Fisch et al., 2019), which includes six datasets: HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), NaturalQuestions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2017), SearchQA (Dunn et al., 2017), SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), and TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017).

These datasets cover many of the text sources commonly used for pre-training (Liu et al., 2019;Lewis et al., 2020), namely Wikipedia (HotpotQA, NaturalQuestions, SQuAD), News articles (NewsQA), and general web text (SearchQA, TriviaQA).

Generating questions.

We run our question generation model over a large set of passages to generate a large dataset of question-answer pairs.

We decode using nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) with p = 0.6, which was chosen by manual inspection to balance diversity with quality of generated questions.

We do not filter questions in any way.

While we observed some flaws related to question quality (questions were not always well-formed) and diversity (for some passages, the same or very similar questions were asked multiple times), this approach nonetheless yielded good downstream results.

Attempts to mitigate these issues, such as using a two-stage beam search to ensure that questions for the same passage have different answers, did not noticeably change our downstream results (see §4.8).

We obtain passages from the same training corpus as RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), which uses four sub-domains: BOOK-CORPUS plus Wikipedia, CC-NEWS, OPENWEB-TEXT, and STORIES.

For each domain, we sample 2 million passages and generate 10 questions per passage, for a total of 80 million questions.2

Teacher Re-Labeling

The answers generated by our BART model are not always accurate, nor are they always spans in the context passage.

To improve the training signal, we re-label examples with a teacher model, as is common in knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015).

We use a standard cross-encoder RoBERTalarge model trained on the MRQA training data as our teacher.

The model takes in the concatenation of the context passage c and question q and predicts a start and a end with two independent 2-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP) heads.

We denote the teacher's predicted probability distribution over a start and a end as T start (c, q) and T end (c, q), respectively.

Bi-Encoder Training

Finally, we train a bi-encoder model to match the cross-encoder predictions on the generated questions.

This objective encourages the contextual representation for a token to have high similarity (in inner product space) with the representation of every question that is answered by that token.

Model.

The bi-encoder model with parameters θ consists of of three components: an encoder r and two question embedding heads h start and h end that map R d → R d .

These heads will only be applied to beginning-of-sequence (i.e., CLS) representations; as shorthand, define f start (x) = h start (r(x) 1 ) and likewise for f end .

Given a context passage c and question q, the model predicts

p θ (a start = i | c, q) ∝ e r(c) ⊤ i fstart(q) (1) p θ (a end = i | c, q) ∝ e r(c) ⊤ i f end (q) (2)

In other words, the model independently encodes the passage and question with r, applies the start and end heads to the CLS token embedding for q, then predicts the answer start (end) index with a softmax over the dot product between the passage representation at that index and the output of the start (end) head.

We initialize r to be the pretrained RoBERTa-large model (Liu et al., 2019), which uses d = 1024.

h start and h end are randomlyinitialized 2-layer MLPs with hidden dimension 1024, matching the default initialization of classification heads in RoBERTa.

3Training.

For an input consisting of context c of length L and question q, we train θ to minimize the KL-divergence between the student and teacher predictions, which is equivalent to the objective

- L i=1 T start (c, q) i log p θ (a start = i | c, q) + T end (c, q) i log p θ (a end = i | c, q) (3)

up to constants that do not depend on θ.

We train for two epochs on the 80 million generated questions, which takes roughly 56 hours on 8 V100 GPUs, or roughly 19 GPU-days.

4 For efficiency, we process all questions for the same passage in the same batch, as encoding passages dominates runtime.

For further details, see Appendix A.1.

Downstream Tasks

We evaluate QUIP on zero-shot paraphrase ranking, few-shot paraphrase classification, few-shot NER, and zero-shot sentiment analysis.

Different tasks showcase different advantages of QUIP.

For paraphrase detection and NER, QUIP succeeds by learning meaningful token-level contextualized representations for single passages, whereas MLM representations are trained to reconstruct uncontextualized word embeddings, and the cross-encoder QA model is trained to represent passage-question pairs.

For NER and sentiment analysis, we prompt QUIP with questions, leveraging its question-answering abilities.

Compared with a cross-encoder, QUIP's bi-encoder architecture enables a more efficient way to use question prompts in NER, and yields more reliable scores when questions are unanswerable in sentiment analysis.

We focus on zero-shot and few-shot settings, as these require pre-trained models that are useful without fine-tuning on a large task-specific training dataset.

QUIP addresses this need by anticipating what information might be useful for downstream tasks-namely, information found in question-answer pairs.

Paraphrase Ranking

We first evaluate QUIP token-level representations by measuring their usefulness for zero-shot paraphrase ranking.

In this task, systems must rank sentence pairs that are paraphrases above pairs that are non-paraphrases, without any task-specific training data.

We compute similarity scores using the F BERT variant of BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020), which measures cosine similarities between the representation of each token in one sentence and its most similar token in the other sentence.

Given sentences x 1 and x 2 of lengths L 1 and L 2 , define

B(x 1 , x 2 ) = 1 L 1 L 1 i=1 max 1≤j≤L 2 r(x 1 ) ⊤ i r(x 2 ) j ∥r(x 1 ) i ∥∥r(x 2 ) j ∥ .

The F BERT BERTScore is defined as the harmonic mean of B(x 1 , x 2 ) and B(x 2 , x 1 ).

Zhang et al. (2020) showed that BERTScore with RoBERTa is useful for both natural language generation evaluation and paraphrase ranking.

Since BERTScore uses token-level representations, we hypothesize that it should pair well with QUIP.

As in Zhang et al. (2020), we use representations from the layer of the network that maximizes Pearson correlation between BERTScore and human judgments on the WMT16 metrics shared task (Bojar et al., 2016).

Paraphrase Classification

We use either frozen or fine-tuned QUIP representations for few-shot paraphrase classification, rather than ranking.

Through these experiments, we can compare QUIP with existing work on few-shot paraphrase classification.

Frozen model.

We train a logistic regression model that uses BERTScore with frozen representations as features.

For a given pair of sentences, we extract eight features, corresponding to BERTScore computed with the final eight layers (i.e., layers 17-24) of the network.

These layers encompass the optimal layers for both RoBERTa-large and QUIP (see §4.4).

Freezing the encoder is often useful in practice, particularly for large models, as the same model can be reused for many tasks (Brown et al., 2020;Du et al., 2020).

Fine-tuning.

For fine-tuning, we use the same computation graph and logistic loss function, but now backpropagate through the parameters of our encoder.

For details, see Appendix A.2.

Named Entity Recognition

We also use QUIP for few-shot5 named entity recognition, which we frame as a BIO tagging task.

Since questions in QA often ask for entities of a specific type, we expect QUIP representations to contain rich entity type information.

We add a linear layer that takes in token-level representations and predicts the tag for each token, and backpropagate log loss through the entire network.

By default, the output layer is initialized randomly.

As a refinement, we propose using question prompts to initialize this model.

The output layer is parameterized by a T × d matrix M , where T is the number of distinct BIO tags.

The log-probability of predicting the j-th tag for token i is proportional to the dot product between the representation for token i and the j-th row of M ; this resembles how the bi-encoder predicts answers.

Thus, we initialize each row of M with the start head embedding of a question related to that row's corresponding entity tag.

For instance, we initialize the parameters for the B-location and I-location tags with the embedding for "What is a location ?" We normalize the question embeddings to have unit L2 norm.

This style of initialization is uniquely enabled by our bi-encoder QA model, as it builds a single passage representation that can simultaneously answer questions corresponding to all entity types.

It would be unclear how to use a language model or a cross-encoder QA model similarly, as it must perform a separate forward pass for each question (i.e., each entity type in this setting).

Zero-Shot Sentiment Analysis

Experiments

Experimental Details

Baselines And Ablations

Bi-Encoder Question Answering

While not our main focus, we first check that QUIP improves bi-encoder QA accuracy, as shown in Table 1.

QUIP improves over Lee et al. (2021)

Zero-Shot Paraphrase Ranking

We validate our approach and study the effects of various ablations on zero-shot paraphrase ranking.

The first half of QUIP training objective is more closely aligned with learning better representations than MLM.

The rest of Table 2 shows zero-shot paraphrase ranking results using BERTScore.

QUIP improves substantially over RoBERTa on all four datasets, with an average improvement of .076 AUROC.

The improvement is greatest on the PAWS datasets; since these datasets cannot be solved by lexical features alone, QUIP representations must be much more contextualized than RoBERTa representations.

Training on Unsupervised QA data degrades performance compared to RoBERTa, showing that QUIP does not merely make word representations encode local context in a simple way.

Training the bi-encoder directly on the MRQA dataset or without the teacher improves on average over RoBERTa, but QUIP greatly outperforms both baselines.

The cross-encoder models also lag behind QUIP at paraphrase ranking, despite their higher QA accuracy; since the cross-encoders are trained to take passagequestion pairs as inputs, their representations of single sentences are not as useful.

Thus, we conclude that having real questions, accurate answer supervision, and a bi-encoder student model are all crucial to the success of QUIP.

Paraphrase Classification

Table 3 shows few-shot paraphrase classification results.

As we studied QUIP-related ablations in the previous section, we focus on the comparison between QUIP and baselines based on MLM.

First, we use RoBERTa-large embeddings in place of QUIP in our method.

Second, we compare with LM-BFF (Gao et al., 2021), which pairs RoBERTalarge with MLM-style prompts.

We use LM-BFF with manually written prompts and demonstrations, which was their best method on QQP by 2.1 F1 and was 0.3 F1 worse than their best method on MRPC.

QUIP used as a frozen encoder is competitive with LM-BFF on QQP and outperforms it by 6.1 F1 on MRPC, 11.2 F1 on PAWS-Wiki, and 12.1 F1 on PAWS-QQP.

Fine-tuning QUIP gives additional improvements on three of the four datasets, and outperforms fine-tuning RoBERTa by an average of 6.9 F1.

Named Entity Recognition

Table 4 shows few-shot NER results on the CoNLL and WNUT datasets.

QUIP improves over RoBERTa-large by 11 F1 on CoNLL and 2.9 F1 on WNUT when used with a randomly initialized output layer.

We see a further improvement of 4 F1 on CoNLL and 7.4 F1 on WNUT when using question embeddings to initialize the output layer.

Using the cross-encoder trained directly on QA data is roughly as good as QUIP when using randomly initialized output layers, but it is incompatible with question embedding initialization.

Sentiment Analysis

Stability Analysis

Discussion And Related Work

Question Generation

Neural question generation has been well-studied for different purposes (Du et al., 2017;Du and Cardie, 2018;Zhao et al., 2018;Lewis and Fan, 2019;Alberti et al., 2019;Puri et al., 2020;Lewis et al., 2021;Bartolo et al., 2021).

We use generated questions to learn general-purpose representations.

We also show that a relatively simple strategy of generating the answer and question together with a single model can be effective; most prior work uses separate answer selection and question generation models.

Phrase-indexed Question Answering Phraseindexed question answering is a paradigm for open-domain QA that retrieves answers by embedding questions and candidate answers in a shared embedding space (Seo et al., 2018(Seo et al., , 2019;;Lee et al., 2020).

It requires using a bi-encoder architecture for efficient phrase retrieval.

Especially related is Lee et al. (2021), which also uses question generation and a cross-encoder teacher model to improve phraseindexed QA, though they focus on improving QA accuracy rather than transfer to other tasks.

Our results reinforce prior observations that bi-encoder models are usually less accurate at QA than crossencoders (see Table 1).

However, the bi-encoder model transfers better to settings that require a contextualized representation of a single passage; the cross-encoder instead optimizes for producing representations of passage-question pairs.

Improving Question Answering

While we use QA to aid pre-training, related work aims to improve accuracy on QA.

Ram et al. (2021) propose a span extraction pre-training objective that enables few-shot QA.

Khashabi et al. (2020) run multi-task training on many QA datasets, both extractive and non-extractive, to improve QA accuracy.

Learning Contextual Representations

Pre-training on unlabeled data has yields useful contextual representations (Peters et al., 2018;Devlin et al., 2019), but further improvements are possible using labeled data.

Intermediate task training (Phang et al., 2018) improves representations by training directly on large labeled datasets.

Muppet (Aghajanyan et al., 2021) improves models by multi-task pre-finetuning on many labeled datasets.

Most similar to our work, QuASE (He et al., 2020) uses extractive QA to pre-train a BERT paragraph encoder.

Our work improves upon QuASE in multiple ways.

First, we use question generation and knowledge distillation to greatly improve over directly training on labeled data, the approach used by QuASE.

Second, we propose multiple ways of leveraging question-based task descriptions to improve accuracy in zero-shot and few-shot settings, thus showing how the QA format can be used as a model-building interface for non-QA tasks; QuASE only uses their model as a feature extractor.

Moreover, since the architecture of QuASE involves a more complex interaction layer than our bi-encoder, it would not be possible to use question prompts to initialize final-layer parameters, as we do for NER.

Other work has used methods similar to ours to learn vector representations of full sentences.

Reimers and Gurevych (2019) train sentence embeddings for sentence similarity tasks using natural language inference data.

Thakur et al. (2021) train a sentence embedding bi-encoder to mimic the predictions of a cross-encoder model.

We learn tokenlevel representations, rather than a single vector for a sentence, and thus use token-level supervision from extractive QA.

Few-Shot Learning

We study few-shot learning without access to unlabeled data, following most recent work (Brown et al., 2020;Gao et al., 2021;Zhao et al., 2021).

Schick and Schütze (2021) notably propose a semisupervised approach that uses unlabeled data for knowledge distillation; this process does not improve accuracy, but mainly improves efficiency.

Moreover, large-scale unlabeled data may not be easily obtainable for all tasks, and utilizing such data increase computation time in the fine-tuning stage, so we focus on the setting without unlabeled data.

The aforementioned work uses language models for few-shot learning by converting tasks to language modeling problems; we develop alternative methods for few-shot learning that use token-level representations and question-based prompts.

Conclusion

Figure 1: An overview of Question Answering Infused Pre-training.

Our model independently creates vector representations (middle) for phrases in a passage (top)and for synthesized questions (bottom).

Our objective encourages the vector for each phrase to have high similarity with the vectors for all questions it answers.

EM and F1 scores on the SQuAD development set for bi-encoder (top) and cross-encoder (bottom) models.

QUIP outperforms the other bi-encoder model baselines, and even a cross-encoder BERT-large model.

The RoBERTa cross-encoder models are better at QA, but will underperform QUIP on non-QA tasks.

Pearson correlation on WMT development data, best layer chosen based on WMT results, and AUROC on zero-shot paraphrase ranking using BERTScore.

QUIP outperforms all baselines on all datasets.

F1 scores on few-shot paraphrase classification, averaged across five training splits (standard errors in subscripts).

QUIP outperforms prior work (LM-BFF;