In this paper, we studied what kind of structural properties in pretraining data is useful to train encoders for natural language tasks.

We have found that to achieve decent results, L1 needs at least statistical dependency in a sentence ( §4), and having the head-to-tail dependency with the nesting structure is further beneficial ( §4 and §5).

The probing experiment in §6 suggests that the encoders trained with languages with the above characteristics are good at capturing the positions and identities of the context words.

From these observations, we suggest a tentative answer to the initial research question: what knowledge in pretrained encoders are transferred across different languages?

That is position-aware context dependence of language, in other words, "tokens in a sequence can be characterized by its neighbor tokens at specific positions".

We think that it can explain the success of transferring the encoder across languages to some extent.

To solve natural language tasks, it is often useful to characterize words in a sentence by the words around them.

For example, to understand the semantics of a sentence, it would be useful to look for the subject by looking for a noun that precedes the word is; to parse a sentence, a word can be identified as a noun because it follows the article the. If the encoder computes the output representation of a word in a sentence by aggregating the information from its surrounding words, that should be a useful inductive bias to solve most NLP tasks in any language.

Also, it is easy to imagine that the knowledge of position-aware context dependence gives a reasonable prior for solving sequence modeling problems in other domains, which may explain the success of cross-modality transfer of language models (Lu et al., 2021;Reid et al., 2022).

Of course, we do not expect that the knowledge of position-aware context dependence explains every aspect of the success of cross-lingual transfer.

As future work, we need further investigation for a more fine-grained view of the transferred knowledge.

Important questions include how much the model size affects the transferability of the encoder or if there is any difference in the knowledge transferred among different downstream tasks.