Pretraining With Artificial Language: Studying Transferable Knowledge In Language Models

Abstract

Introduction

Transferable Structural Knowledge In Pretrained Encoders

Multilingual language models trained with masked language modeling objective (Devlin et al., 2019;Doddapaneni et al., 2021) have demonstrated a surprisingly strong cross-lingual transfer capability (Liu et al., 2020), given the model is only trained with a mix of monolingual corpora.

This leads to several studies investigating the source of the cross-lingual capability of multilingual models.

An early common hypothesis was that the models take advantage of a common word-piece vocabulary across languages (Wu and Dredze, 2019;Pires et al., 2019), which provides cross-lingual alignment signals to learn useful multilingual representations.

However, this hypothesis has been questioned by recent studies (Karthikeyan K and Roth, 2020;Conneau et al., 2020b) which show that shared word-pieces only play a minor role in the performance.

These studies suggest that the model can exploit abstract structures of languages to learn shared multilingual representations.

Another line of research suggests that the learning of transferable knowledge happens even in monolingual pretraining.

Artetxe et al. (2020) showed that a Transformer encoder pretrained only on L1 exhibits strong cross-lingual transfer performance simply by aligning the L2 embeddings to the encoder.

Papadimitriou and Jurafsky (2020) pretrained LSTM encoders with natural languages and non-linguistic data (e.g., code, music, and artificial data) to demonstrate that the encoders achieve reasonable performance in Spanish language modeling.

These studies provide additional evidence for the existence of transferable linguistic knowledge learned in the model.

Then what is such knowledge?

Probing studies (Hupkes and Zuidema, 2018;Conneau et al., 2018) have revealed that the model captures languageindependent structures such as universal dependency relations (Chi et al., 2020) and subjecthood (Papadimitriou et al., 2021).

However, the probing methodology does not answer whether such linguistic knowledge contributes to the performance in cross-lingual transfer.

In this study, we shed light on this question by studying transfer learning from artificial language with the Test for Inductive Bias via Language Model Transfer (TILT) (Papadimitriou and Jurafsky, 2020).

This framework enables us to assess if abstract features generalizable to L2 (natural language) are encoded in L1.

Here we explicitly design artificial languages with some structural properties as L1 to investigate their transferability.

Studying Language Models With Artificial Language

Approach

Experimental Framework

Designing Artificial Languages

Artificial languages are designed to mimic a certain property of natural language.

After providing a formal definition of artificial language, we introduce several languages used in this paper.

Formulation Of Artificial Language

A artificial language refers to a set of a vocabulary and algorithms to generate sequential data for pretraining.

Each language has a sentence-length distribution p len (l), token vocabulary {w|w ∈ V}, and sentence-sampling function f (l) : l → V l .

The training data is generated sentence by sentence as follows: we first sample a sentence length (l ∼ p len (l)) and then sample a sequence of tokens of that length ([w 1 , ..., w l ] ∼ f (l)).

In this study, the token vocabulary V simply consists of integers (or integers with a special symbol) and is not intended to correspond to a vocabulary of any natural language.

Also the sentence-length distribution p len (l) is fitted with a baseline dataset in each experiment.

The focus is how to design the sentence-sampling function f (l).

This determines what kind of characteristics we want to encode in the artificial dataset.

Modeling Word Distribution

Modeling Latent Dependency Structure

Causal Language Model Pretraining With Artificial Language

Experimental Setups

Results

Masked Language Model Pretraining With Artificial Language

Experimental Setups

Results

Experimental Setups

Results

Discussion And Future Work

Comparison of token distributions. (b) Comparison of dependency structures.

(c) Comparison of natural languages.

Figure 2: The perplexity scores (the lower the better) on the sentence-level causal language modeling task with the English Penn Treebank dataset.

The two baselines (From scratch and Random weights) are not pretrained, and the others are the results of pretrained encoders.

Figure 3: The downstream performance on two syntactic tasks with the English EWT dataset.

The two baselines (From scratch and Random weights) are not pretrained, and the others are the results of encoders pretrained with masked language modeling.

Figure 4: The accuracy of the task of recovering the contextual words from the encoder output of target words.