While research into automatic cloze test generation is vast (Mostow et al., 2017;Kurdi et al., 2020;Yang et al., 2021), work on open cloze tests for language learning is scarce.

Pino et al. (2008) generate open cloze questions using sample sentences from a learners' dictionary based on four linguistic criteria: (grammatical) complexity, welldefined context (collocations), grammaticality and length.

A later version of their system adds hints for gapped words (Pino and Eskenazi, 2009).

Exercise Maker (Malafeev, 2014) is a rule-based open source system that attempts to emulate exercises in Cambridge English examinations based on the most frequently tested words.

Most of the gaps it proposes were found to be useful and the automated exercises were hard to differentiate from authentic tests.

Chinkina et al. (2017) generate open cloze exercises for phrasal verbs by extracting sentences from news articles and generating a pair of questions and answers where the identified particle verbs are gapped.

Similarly, Soonklang et al. (2017) gap words in sentences according to their part of speech in order to practise articles, prepositions, etc.

Finally, Marrese-Taylor et al. (2018) use LSTMs to build sequence labelling and classification models that decide where to insert a single gap in a single sentence.

Automatic evaluation against goldstandard gaps showed the method was effective.

Other work has focused on creating automated cloze tests by controlling aspects of the proposed gaps so that they correlate with a target proficiency level.

Lee et al. (2019), for example, manipulate the difficulty of C-tests (open cloze tests with hints, Grotjahn et al. (2002)) by varying the position and word length of the gaps.

A similar concept is presented by Settles et al. (2020) and McCarthy et al. (2021), although difficulty is predicted using a machine-learning model that correlates with CEFR levels.

In these cases, tests are dynamically adapted to the examinee's proficiency level during the test session.

From a different perspective, Felice and Buttery (2019) show that controlling gap entropy can be useful for designing open cloze tests at different CEFR levels.

The work we present in this paper, however, aims to model the more complex task of predicting a full set of gaps at the paragraph level that comply with design and testing principles and is, to the best of our knowledge, the first to employ and adapt transformer-based models for this task.

System evaluation is also challenging, since there is usually more than one potential word in the text that could constitute a good gap.

While previous work often made a choice between automatic (Marrese-Taylor et al., 2018) or human evaluation (Malafeev, 2014;Das and Majumder, 2017) for their experiments, we perform both: automatic evaluation to identify the best models during development and human evaluation to measure test quality in the final output.