One of the reviewers of this paper pointed out that its main scientific finding is that "money works!" Strategically deployed, funding for research into technologies for neglected languages can have a significant impact.

This reviewer even suggested that the project described here might have lessons for governments in other parts of the world which seek to help minority languages.

There is a caveat: the research must be done respectfully, in collaboration with the communities who are the custodians of these languages.

There should be no room in this field for scholars whose main goal is extracting "interesting" research without considering the linguistic needs of communities.

Our greatest challenge in this project was doing our best to build respectful relationships with communities.

The two goals do not necessarily conflict.

There are many interesting research themes that have the potential to help under-resourced languages.

Examples in this project include implementing verb conjugators, machine translation, and speech recognition for polysynthetic languages.

But there are also low-hanging fruit, challenges that do not require advanced research -they can be tackled with today's technologies -but which, when overcome, can have linguistic benefits for communities.

An example is the production of Read-along audio books in Indigenous languages.

Automating this process posed a technical challenge of only moderate difficulty, but educators find the end product very useful.

Our focus in Phase II is on making the technologies described above easier for Indigenous communities to deploy themselves.

For instance, we would like to make the Read-along interface so user-friendly that there is no need to consult the NRC team to produce Read-along versions of audio books (the team is having trouble keeping up with demand).

We have a similar goal for text prediction on mobile devices.

It will be harder to develop a framework that enables Indigenous educators to build software-based verb conjugators for their languages without requiring the educators to have specialized IT knowledge, but we are working on this as well.

Ideally, we will make all the technologies described above more user-friendly.

All software developed by NRC's ILT project team will be released as open-source.