In this study, the global impact of the transport sectors (land transport, shipping, and aviation) on aerosol and the resulting climate effects for the present day (2015) and three future projections for 2030 and 2050 are assessed using the recent CMIP6 emission inventory and the SSP scenarios as an input to a state-of-the-art global aerosol-climate model, including detailed aerosol microphysics and an explicit representation of aerosol-radiation and aerosol-cloud interactions.

The results are compared with the findings of our previous assessments (Righi et al., 2013(Righi et al., , 2015(Righi et al., , 2016)), which used a predecessor version of the same model and the earlier CMIP5 emission data for the year 2000 combined with the RCP projections for 2030.

In the simulations for present-day (2015) conditions, black carbon and nitrate are found to be highly relevant pollutants from land transport, which contributes 15 %-20 % of the near-surface concentrations of these species.

The shipping sector is also an important source of nitrate pollution, responsible for more than 20 % of its near-surface concentration over the oceans, and still contributes significantly to aerosol sulfate pollution, despite the introduction of control measures for fuel sulfur content in shipping by MARPOL in 2010.

The aviation contribution to the aerosol mass concentrations in the upper troposphere is generally small (below 5 %), while it is larger for the particle number (5 %-10 %).

The results for the transport-induced aerosol mass concentrations generally confirm the findings of R13, although some major differences exist, especially in the geographical distribution of the transport impacts.

These are essentially due to the updated emission inventory used as an input to the model simulations and the different year under investigation (2015 vs. 2000) but also to the improvement of the model.

Substantial differences, on the other hand, are found in terms of simulated transport-induced impacts on aerosol number concentration.

This is because the new MADE3 model version adopted here is characterized by a generally lower background concentration of particles as a result of different as- sumptions on the particle size distribution upon emissions by anthropogenic sources (including transport) and an improved representation of the ageing of newly formed particles via the nucleation process.

The extensive evaluation performed by Kaiser et al. (2019) and Righi et al. (2020) shows that the new model version provides a better representation of the aerosol background and the climate mean state of the key cloud and radiation variables compared with observations.

This results in larger RF effects for land transport and aviation with respect to the previous assessment, while a smaller RF is simulated for shipping, thanks also to the reduced sulfate impacts following the MARPOL regulations on fuel sulfur content.

The mid-and long-term projections of the transport effects under the SSPs are generally consistent with the narratives underlying the scenarios.

SSP1 is characterized by the lowest impacts, with a strong decrease in the land transport effects, a slight decrease for shipping, and a lower increase than the other scenarios for aviation.

The climate impacts of shipping and aviation in this scenario are still relatively high despite a strong reduction in their emissions, which can be ascribed to the very low background concentrations, which are mostly controlled by the emissions of the other anthropogenic sectors.

The results for the SSP2 scenario confirm its middle-of-the-road nature, which is evident especially in the impacts of the land transport sector.

A peculiarity of this scenario is the low climate impact of shipping, due to low emissions from this sector combined with still-elevated aerosol levels induced by other sectors, and the relatively large impact of aviation, whose emissions in this scenario are still high compared to other sectors.

The strong growth of pollution characterizing SSP3 is remarkable, showing steadily growing impacts in 2030 and 2050 with respect to 2015, especially in the land transport sector.

These results show that the impacts of the transport sectors under the SSPs are more consistent with the respective storylines than in the predecessor RCP scenarios used in Righi et al. (2015Righi et al. ( , 2016)).

From the analysis of the simulations in this study we can conclude that the challenges in quantifying the impact of the transport sectors on aerosol and climate are twofold.

On the one hand, reliable emission inventories are essential for a correct quantification of the resulting impacts: this concerns not only the total emitted mass, but also its geographical distribution.

On the other hand, the representation of the aerosol concentration background in the model can play a significant role in characterizing the impact of the perturbation introduced by the emissions of the specific sectors.

This is particularly the case when analysing the scenario projections, as the potential reduction in the emissions for a given sector needs to be set in the context of the emission changes in other sectors.

Policy measures cannot therefore be evaluated only focusing on a single sector but have to be considered as part of a larger picture.

The representation of the background is also a modelling challenge, and our results suggest that an accurate representation of the aerosol background concentrations is important and can significantly affect the estimated impacts, as is clear when comparing the outcome of the present study with the results of the previous assessment obtained with a predecessor version of the same model.

The prominent role of the background has further consequences for the development and application of climate response models (e.g. Grewe and Stenke, 2008;Wild et al., 2012;Dahlmann et al., 2016;Rieger and Grewe, 2022) to assess the transportation impacts of aerosol, implying that the global model simulations for training these models should be performed with varying background conditions in the region of interest.

On the policy side, a further challenge is posed by the trade-offs connected with the implementation of specific measures.

One prominent example is the reduction in fuel sulfur content in shipping to improve air quality along the coastlines, which at the same time leads to a reduction in the ship-induced cooling via the aerosol indirect effect, in turn reducing the offset of greenhouse warming (Quaas et al., 2022).

Future modelling studies will also need to deal with the growing impacts of alternative fuels and their consequences for the atmospheric composition, for example hydrogen, ammonia, and methanol (Popa et al., 2015;McKinlay et al., 2021;Wen et al., 2023), and new particle types resulting from non-combustion processes (Grigoratos and Martini, 2014;Timmers and Achten, 2016), whose impact is projected to become increasingly important with the progressive electrification of the land transport sector.

This paper focuses on the impact of the transport sectors on aerosol and the related climate effects in the SSPs.

Two companion studies are currently ongoing to address the transport impact on ozone and the overall impacts of the transport sectors (comparing CO 2 and non-CO 2 effects), respectively.

Code and data availability.

MESSy is continuously developed and applied by a consortium of institutions.

MESSy and the source code are licensed to all affiliates of institutions which are members of the MESSy Consortium.

Institutions can become members of the MESSy Consortium by signing the MESSy Memorandum of Understanding.

More information can be found on the MESSy Consortium website (http://www.messy-interface.org, last access: 15 June 2023).

The model configuration discussed in this paper is based on EMAC version 2.55.

The exact set-up used to produce the results of this paper is archived at the German Climate Computing Center (DKRZ) and can be made available to members of the MESSy community upon request.

The output of the model simulations discussed in this paper is available at https: //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8134336 (Righi, 2023).

Supplement.

The supplement related to this article is available online at: https://doi.org/10.5194/esd-14-835-2023-supplement.

Author contributions.

MR conceived the study, designed and performed the simulations, analysed the data, and wrote the paper.

JH conceived the study and contributed to the simulation design and to the text.

SB prepared the CMIP6-SSP emission data used to drive the model simulations and contributed to the text.