In this assessment we apply the global model EMAC with the aerosol submodel MADE3.

EMAC is a chemistry and climate model featuring several submodels to simulate tropospheric and middle-atmospheric processes and their interaction with oceans, land, and human influences (Jöckel et al., 2010).

EMAC is based on the second version of the Modular Earth Submodel System (MESSy) to link multiinstitutional computer codes.

The core atmospheric model is the ECHAM5 (fifth-generation European Centre Hamburg) general circulation model (Roeckner et al., 2006).

Aerosol microphysics is represented by the aerosol submodel MADE3 (Kaiser et al., 2014), which considers aerosol sulfate, ammonium, nitrate, sea salt, particulate organic matter, black carbon, mineral dust, and aerosol water.

These species are distributed among nine aerosol modes, resulting from the combination of three size classes (Aitken, accumulation, and coarse) with three particle mixing states (soluble, insoluble, and mixed particles).

The representation of aerosol mass and number concentrations in MADE3 has been evaluated in detail in Kaiser et al. (2019), using observational data from various station networks around the globe, from aircraft campaigns, and from satellite observations.

For the present study, we apply the model configuration developed by Righi et al. (2020Righi et al. ( , 2021)), which further includes an explicit representation of aerosol-radiation and aerosol-cloud interactions.

Cloud microphysics and precipitation are dealt with by the CLOUD submodel, which in this configuration considers aerosol effects on warm, mixedphase, and cirrus clouds based on the two-moment cloud scheme by Kuebbeler et al. (2014).

Cloud-radiation and aerosol-radiation interactions are simulated by the submodels CLOUDOPT and RAD (Dietmüller et al., 2016), respectively.

As the focus of this study lies in the radiative effects of aerosol and clouds, the concentrations of the radiatively active gases CO 2 , CH 4 , N 2 O, O 3 , and chlorofluorocarbons are prescribed using globally averaged values for the year 2015.

The studies by Kaiser et al. (2019) and Righi et al. (2020) demonstrated the model's ability to reproduce the relevant observed aerosol properties both close to the surface and in the middle and upper troposphere, as well as the main cloud and radiative properties.

This configuration of EMAC is therefore suited to the scope of the present study.

The chosen model resolution is T42L41, corresponding to a horizontal resolution of about 2.8 • × 2.8 • in latitude and longitude (roughly 300 km at the Equator), with 41 nonequidistant vertical levels from the ground to about 5 hPa, mostly centred within the troposphere.

All simulations cover a period of 11 years, between 2005 and 2015, with the first year used as spin-up and hence not included in the analysis.

The model meteorology (temperature, winds, and logarithm of the surface pressure) is nudged using the ERA-Interim reanalysis data for the same time period (Dee et al., 2011).

As in R13, the effects of the transport sectors are quantified using the perturbation approach, in which a reference simulation is compared to a sensitivity one where the emissions of a given sector are completely neglected.

In the following sections, we show both the absolute change (A) due to the emissions from the given sector and their relative contribution (R) to a specific quantity (e.g. burden or concentration).

Considering, for instance, the land transport sector, these are defined as

A = REF -NOLAND (1) R = (REF -NOLAND)/REF , (2

)

where REF is the reference simulation and NOLAND the sensitivity simulation with land transport emissions switched off.

The same applies to the other two sectors, i.e. shipping and aviation.

The statistical significance of A and R is veri-fied by means of a two-tailed t test with respect to the interannual variability.

We consider the results to be statistically significant when their confidence level is above 95 %.

As shown by R13, the perturbation method outlined above could lead to some inaccuracies in the estimated effects, due to the non-linearities in the involved processes, which in particular affect the secondary aerosol species.

Alternative methods, such as for example tagging (Grewe, 2013;Rieger et al., 2018;Mertens et al., 2018), are hard to apply to the aerosol phase, especially for secondary species, due to the difficulties in tracking the chemical processes taking place in both the gas phase and the liquid phase (e.g. aerosol sulfate formation).

Furthermore, the bulk of the climate effects estimated here are expected to result from aerosol interactions with clouds, which cannot be isolated with the tagging approach, due to the prominent role of feedbacks.