Unlabeled data.

TagLM was inspired by the widespread use of pre-trained word embeddings in supervised sequence tagging models.

Besides pre-trained word embeddings, our method is most closely related to Li and McCallum (2005).

Instead of using a LM, Li and McCallum (2005) uses a probabilistic generative model to infer contextsensitive latent variables for each token, which are then used as extra features in a supervised CRF tagger (Lafferty et al., 2001).

Other semisupervised learning methods for structured prediction problems include co-training (Blum and Mitchell, 1998;Pierce and Cardie, 2001), expectation maximization (Nigam et al., 2000;Mohit and Hwa, 2005), structural learning (Ando and Zhang, 2005) and maximum discriminant functions (Suzuki et al., 2007;Suzuki and Isozaki, 2008).

It is easy to combine TagLM with any of the above methods by including LM embeddings as additional features in the discriminative components of the model (except for expectation maximization).

A detailed discussion of semisupervised learning methods in NLP can be found in (Søgaard, 2013).

Melamud et al. (2016) learned a context encoder from unlabeled data with an objective function similar to a bi-directional LM and applied it to several NLP tasks closely related to the unlabeled objective function: sentence completion, lexical substitution and word sense disambiguation.

LM embeddings are related to a class of methods (e.g., Le and Mikolov, 2014;Kiros et al., 2015;Hill et al., 2016) for learning sentence and document encoders from unlabeled data, which can be used for text classification and textual entailment among other tasks.

Dai and Le (2015) pre-trained LSTMs using language models and sequence autoencoders then fine tuned the weights for classification tasks.

In contrast to our method that uses unlabeled data to learn token-in-context embeddings, all of these methods use unlabeled data to learn an encoder for an entire text sequence (sentence or document).

Neural language models.

LMs have always been a critical component in statistical machine translation systems (Koehn, 2009).

Recently, neural LMs (Bengio et al., 2003;Mikolov et al., 2010) have also been integrated in neural machine translation systems (e.g., Kalchbrenner and Blunsom, 2013;Devlin et al., 2014) to score candidate translations.

In contrast, TagLM uses neural LMs to encode words in the input sequence.

Unlike forward LMs, bidirectional LMs have received little prior attention.

Most similar to our formulation, Peris and Casacuberta (2015) used a bidirectional neural LM in a statistical machine translation system for instance selection.

They tied the input token embeddings and softmax weights in the forward and backward directions, unlike our approach which uses two distinct models without any shared parameters.

Frinken et al. ( 2012) also used a bidirectional n-gram LM for handwriting recognition.

Interpreting RNN states.

Recently, there has been some interest in interpreting the activations of RNNs.

Linzen et al. (2016) showed that single LSTM units can learn to predict singular-plural distinctions.

Karpathy et al. (2015) visualized character level LSTM states and showed that individual cells capture long-range dependencies such as line lengths, quotes and brackets.

Our work complements these studies by showing that LM states are useful for downstream tasks as a way of interpreting what they learn.

Other sequence tagging models.

Current state of the art results in sequence tagging problems are based on bidirectional RNN models.

However, many other sequence tagging models have been proposed in the literature for this class of problems (e.g., Lafferty et al., 2001;Collins, 2002).

LM embeddings could also be used as additional features in other models, although it is not clear whether the model complexity would be sufficient to effectively make use of them.