Semi-Supervised Sequence Tagging With Bidirectional Language Models

Abstract

Introduction

Overview

The main components in our language-modelaugmented sequence tagger (TagLM) are illustrated in Fig. 1.

After pre-training word embeddings and a neural LM on large, unlabeled corpora (Step 1), we extract the word and LM embeddings for every token in a given input sequence (Step 2) and use them in the supervised sequence tagging model (Step 3).

Baseline Sequence Tagging Model

Bidirectional Lm

A language model computes the probability of a token sequence (t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t N )

p(t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t N ) = N k=1 p(t k | t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t k-1 ).

Recent state of the art neural language models (Józefowicz et al., 2016) use a similar architecture to our baseline sequence tagger where they pass a token representation (either from a CNN over characters or as token embeddings) through multiple layers of LSTMs to embed the history (t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t k ) into a fixed dimensional vector -→ h LM k .

This is the forward LM embedding of the token at position k and is the output of the top LSTM layer in the language model.

Finally, the language model predicts the probability of token t k+1 using a softmax layer over words in the vocabulary.

The need to capture future context in the LM embeddings suggests it is beneficial to also consider a backward LM in additional to the traditional forward LM.

A backward LM predicts the previous token given the future context.

Given a sentence with N tokens, it computes

p(t 1 , t 2 , . . . , t N ) = N k=1 p(t k | t k+1 , t k+2 , . . . , t N ).

A backward LM can be implemented in an analogous way to a forward LM and produces the backward LM embedding ←h LM k , for the sequence (t k , t k+1 , . . . , t N ), the output embeddings of the top layer LSTM.

In our final system, after pre-training the forward and backward LMs separately, we remove the top layer softmax and concatenate the forward and backward LM embeddings to form bidirectional LM embeddings, i.e., h

LM k = [ - → h LM k ; ← - h LM k ].

Note that in our formulation, the forward and backward LMs are independent, without any shared parameters.

Combining Lm With Sequence Model

Experiments

Overall System Results

Analysis

Related Work

Conclusion

CoNLL 2000 chunking.

The CoNLL 2000 chunking task uses sections 15-18 from the Wall Street Journal corpus for training and section 20 for testing.

It defines 11 syntactic chunk types (e.g., NP, VP, ADJP) in addition to other.

We randomly sampled 1000 sentences from the training set as a held-out development set.

using the forward-backward algorithm at training time, and using the Viterbi algorithm to find the most likely tag sequence at test time, similar to

Test set F 1 comparison on CoNLL 2000 Chunking task using only CoNLL 2000 data and unlabeled text.

In this experiment, we concatenate the LM embeddings at dif-Improvements in test set F 1 in CoNLL 2003 NER when including additional labeled data or task specific gazetteers (except the case of TagLM where we do not use additional labeled resources).

Improvements in test set F 1 in CoNLL 2000 Chunking when including additional labeled data (except the case of TagLM where we do not use additional labeled data).

Comparison of CoNLL-2003 test set F 1 when the LM embeddings are included at different layers in the baseline tagger.

CoNLL 2003 training and development data.

Due to the much smaller size of this data Forward language model Backward language model LM perplexity F 1 ± std Comparison of CoNLL-2003 test set F 1 for different language model combinations.

All language models were trained and evaluated on the 1B Word Benchmark, except LSTM-512-256 * which was trained and evaluated on the standard splits of the NER CoNLL 2003 dataset.