Most countries have long ago adopted recycling to preserve the environment's health, which is often related to human health aspects.

1 Recycling behaviour has promoted a positive attitude towards the environment within society.

Around the world, municipal waste production correlates with a country's economic growth.

Statistics show that proenvironmental behaviour, awareness, and intentions are the most direct measures for coping with daily household waste production.

Nonetheless, plastic packaging increased 53% internationally during the lockdown in the pandemic situation between March and June 2020.

2 Studies conducted in 2017 and 2018 show negative attitudes of the individuals like the lack of participation, feeling less responsible and not being aware of recycling in many countries have claimed that recycling education and infrastructure are insufficient.

3,4 However, the negative attitudes had caused severe environmental destruction, as they are often more reactive and 'always forgot' or 'do not care' about the act of recycling when there is no support from recycling infrastructure, facilities or programmes.

5 This research aims to examine the factors that influence youths' recycling intention after experiencing a gamified online learning activity, Edcraft Gamified Learning (EGL), and to explore the effectiveness of gamified learning about recycling within a research framework.

6 2. Literature review 2.1 Gamification in learning Gamified learning is a term that refers to the fusion of gamification and education.

It is, in essence, the application of game-design elements and game principles to the context of learning.

Gamification has primarily been used in education to increase motivation for tasks or activities that are frequently perceived as boring or less enjoyable, particularly given that motivation is a significant predictor of students' academic achievement.

Gamified learning's primary goal is to maintain learners' engagement and motivation, as well as to assist learners in achieving their learning objectives while having fun.

Gamified learning is a process in which the traditional classroom methodology is transformed into a welldesigned, enjoyable classroom environment through the incorporation of game design and game-like experiences into the learning processes.

It is a strategy for facilitating effective learning by involving learners in game-like elements such as challenges (levels, missions), competitions (leaderboards), and recognitions (points, rewards).

Learning can take place on any subject, but this study focuses on recycling, which is also an action that contributes to environmental sustainability.