While multifaceted, vague, and non-named entities can be present in well-curated data, the corresponding benchmarks and downstream applications target real-world named entities and ignore non-named entities (Paris and Suchanek, 2021).

In contrast, in most user-generated text domains, the concepts of interest for downstream applications (semantic search feature as discussed above) are not limited to named-entities only and may exhibit multifaceted, vague, and non-named entities (e.g., facts about a hotel such as amenities and attractions).

With the increasing use of user-generated text in NLP applications (Xu et al., 2021), it is therefore important to investigate the impact of the aforementioned characteristics on the performance of the ESE methods.

We now discuss the implications of the proposed benchmark, metrics, and experiment observations.

Capturing the silent majority.

Recent work (Paris and Suchanek, 2021) shows that the majority of the entities in Wikipedia articleswhich feeds knowledge-bases such as DBpedia (Auer et al., 2007) and YAGO (Suchanek et al., 2007) -are non-named and recommends adding the silent majority to these KBs for completeness.

To this end, our proposed benchmark highlights the importance of capturing multifaceted, vague, and non-named entities present in user-generated text.

For example, domain-specific KBs such as the Amazon Product Knowledge Graph (Karamanolakis et al., 2020) rely on user-generated text to collect entities for concepts of interest.

These KBs power many downstream tasks such as semantic search, question answering, and conversational AI.

Therefore, these KBs would remain incomplete without capturing the different types of entities identified in our benchmark.

Practical usage.

The goal of our evaluation metrics (evaluation at k g ) is to characterize the performance of ESE methods in the presence of entity types that are typically present in user-generated text.

Note that we do not recommend replacing the existing metric MAP@K = 20.

Our proposed MAP@K g metric is complementary and is designed to stress test ESE methods in scenarios where coverage is an important criteria (e.g., KB population.)

) Top-20 predictions do not have enough representation of non-named, multifaceted, and vague entities.

Therefore, when evaluating ESE methods designed for user-generated text on our benchmark, the proposed evaluation at k g metric may help practitioners measure the suitability of a method.

Towards domain-specific ESE.

Our study highlights that compared to simple ESE baselines, SOTA methods exhibit poor performance on usergenerated text.

On the other hand, for well-curated text, SOTA methods outperform the baselines.

However, the purpose of this study is not to show that there are better approaches than SOTA methods.

Instead, we draw attention to the fact that, there is potential for future research on developing methods for user-generated text domain.