We first describe the ESE methods we evaluate.

Following prior work (Shen et al., 2018;Zhang et al., 2020a), we use AutoPhrase (Shang et al., 2018) to generate candidate entity lists from the corpus of a given domain.

We then use the following representative publicly available ESE methods from different paradigms to expand the seed set3 .

SetExpan.

SetExpan (Shen et al., 2017) is a SOTA corpus-based method that iteratively ranks entity candidates by filtering out noisy skip-gram features.

It incorporates other context features such as POS tags and syntactic head tokens in ranking.

Embedding baseline (Emb-Base).

In order to make use for more robust context embeddings, we develop a simple baseline that uses a pre-trained language model (LM) to derive context embeddings of entity candidates.

To derive an entity embedding, we average context embedding of the sentences that mention the entity using BERT (Devlin et al., 2018).

We compute concept embeddings by averaging embeddings of its seed entities, and rank entity candidates based on the cosine similarity of concept and entity embeddings.

CGExpan.

CGExpan (Zhang et al., 2020b) is a SOTA LM-based method that iteratively uses Hearst patterns (Hearst, 1992) as prompts to obtain scores for ranking candidates.

In addition, it considers how a candidate in turn ranks the target concept name to improve the quality of rankings.

LM Probing Baseline (LM-Base).

We develop a simpler baseline that also uses Hearst patterns to prompt LMs and obtain scores for entity candidates.

However, it does not include any other mechanisms such as concept name guidance and iterative expansion like CGExpan.

Ensemble Methods.

We use mean reciprocal rank (MRR) as the representative for ensemble methods since it does not require any additional training data.

Given the rankings from multiple methods, we compute MRR score of each entity: e) , where n is the number of methods combined, and r i (e) is the ranking of entity e under method i. We then re-rank all entities based on their MRR score.

In this work, we study combinations of two ESE methods leading to 6 ensembles.

We study 4 settings that offer interesting combinations across different paradigms:

M RR(e) = 1 n n i=1 1 r i (

• MRR-Baseline: Emb-Base + LM-Base.

• MRR-SOTA: SetExpan + CGExpan.

• MRR-Corpus: SetExpan + Emb-Base.

• MRR-LM-Probe: CGExpan + LM-Base.