Recently, neural network-based approaches have shown promising results on inducing parse trees directly from words.

Our weakly-supervised parser is comparable in behavior to a fully unsupervised parser as it does not rely on syntactic annotations.

We highlight some themes most relevant to our method.

Learning from distant supervision.

A related work to ours (Shi et al., 2021) uses answer fragments and webpage hyperlinks to mine syntactic constituents for parsing.

Many previous studies depend on punctuation as a strong signal to detect constituent boundaries (Spitkovsky et al., 2013;Parikh et al., 2014).

Incorporating bootstrapping techniques.

Cotraining (Yarowsky, 1995;Blum and Mitchell, 1998;Abney, 2007) and self-training (Steedman et al., 2003;McClosky et al., 2006;Cohen and Smith, 2010) are bootstrapping methods that attempt to convert a fully unsupervised learning problem to a semi-supervised learning form.

More recently, Mohananey et al. (2020); Shi et al. (2020); Steedman et al. (2003) have shown the benefits of using self-training as a standard post-hoc processing step for unsupervised parsing models.

Using inside-outside representations constructed with a latent tree chart parser.

Drawing inspiration from the inside-outside algorithm (Baker, 1979), DIORA (Drozdov et al., 2019) optimizes an autoencoder objective and computes a vector representation for each node in a tree by combining child representations recursively.

To recover from errors and make DIORA more robust to local errors when computing the best parse in the bottom-up chart parsing, an improved variant of DIORA, S-DIORA (Drozdov et al., 2020) achieves it.

Inducing tree structure by introducing an inductive bias to RNNs.

PRPN (Shen et al., 2018) introduces a neural parsing network that has the ability to make differentiable parsing decisions using structured attention mechanism to regulate skip connections in an RNN.

ON-LSTM (Shen et al., 2019) enables hidden neurons to learn information by a combination of gating mechanism as well as activation function.

In URNNG, Kim et al. (2019b) employs parameterized function over latent trees to handle intractable marginalization and inject strong inductive biases for the unsupervised learning of the recurrent neural network grammar (RNNG; Dyer et al. 2016).

Peng et al. (2019) introduces PaLM that acts as an attention component on top of RNN.

Compound PCFG (Kim et al., 2019a) which consists of a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with a PCFG decoder, found the original PCFG is fully capable of inducing trees if it uses a neural parameterization.

Jin et al. (2019) show that the flow-based PCFG induction model is capable of using morphological and semantic information in context embeddings for grammar induction.

Zhu et al. (2020) proposes neural L-PCFGs to simultaneously induce both constituents and dependencies.

Concerning PLMs.

Tree Transformer (Wang et al., 2019) adds locality constraints to the Transformer encoder's self-attention such that the attention heads resemble a tree structure.

Kim et al. (2020) extract trees from pre-trained transformers.

Refining based on constituency tests. With the help of transformations and RoBERTa model to make grammaticality decisions, (Cao et al., 2020) were able to achieve strong performance for unsupervised parsing.