In general, FND can be interpreted as a binary classification task where a text document is classified as either Fake News or No Fake News or as a multi-class problem often with ordinal labels.

One major distinction in different classification algorithms can be drawn in the consideration of auxiliary information.

Most contributions take a purely feature-oriented approach, while others try to incorporate information revolving around spreading Fake News and the respective dissemination process.

The feature-based approach focuses on extracting relevant linguistic peculiarities associated with Fake News.

Typical examples are characters n-grams, words or a measure of the readability and syntax of an article body (Pérez-Rosas et al., 2018, p.5).

Other authors included the average word length, counts of exclamation marks or the sentiment of an article (Khan et al., 2019, p.6).

After finding appropriate features, traditional machine learning algorithms as well as (deep) neural networks are proposed to classify the text instance given the extracted features.

Other feature-based approaches directly rely on deep learning, using neural networks for learning good representations of the text input by a stack of hidden layers which is then fed in a last classification layer.

This approach is used by Yang et al. (2018) who simultaneously train a CNN on text and image data to classify fake entities and by Dong et al. (2019) who implement a two-step approach of using supervised and unsupervised learning with a CNN as well. But despite the fact that feature-based approaches are fairly popular within the FND research, Shu et al. (2017) argue that they are not sufficient.

Approaches that use auxiliary information e.g. revolve around modeling the dissemination process of Fake News by incorporating spatio-temporal information about users who like, share or publish (potential) Fake News (Ruchansky et al., 2017;Ren and Zhang, 2020).

The FNC-1 organizers use a feature-based approach by proposing a baseline model that extracts various features from the headlines and article bodies.

The approach of specifically modeling the relationship between a headline and a respective article body was also exploited by Yoon et al. (2019) in the context of clickbait detection while the FNC-1 takes this approach as a pre-step to FND.