The importance of combating misinformation was once again illustrated by the coronavirus pandemic, which came along with a lot of "potentially lethal" misinformation.

At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, the United Nations (UN) (DGC, 2020) started even using the term "infodemic" for this phenomenon of misinformation and called for proper dissemination of reliable facts.

However, tackling misinformation online and specifically on social media platforms is challenging due to the variety of information, volume, and speed of streaming data.

As a consequence, several studies have explored different aspects of COVID-19 misinformation online including sharing patterns (Pennycook et al., 2020), platform-dependent engagement patterns (Cinelli et al., 2020), web search behaviors (Rovetta and Bhagavathula, 2020), and fake images (Sánchez and Pascual, 2020).

We are primarily interested in claims on social media from a multimodal perspective (Figure 1).

Claim detection can be seen as an initial step in fighting misinformation and as a precursor to prioritize potentially false information for fact-checking.

Traditionally, claim detection is studied from a linguistic standpoint where both syntax (Rosenthal and McKeown, 2012) and semantics (Levy et al., 2014) of the language matter to detect a claim accurately.

However, claims or fake news on social media are not bound to just one modality and become a complex problem with additional modalities like images and videos.

While it is clear that a claim in the text is denoted in verbal form, it can also be part of the visual content or as overlaid text in the image.

Even though much effort has been spent on the curation of datasets (Boididou et al., 2016;Nakamura et al., 2020;Jindal et al., 2020) and the development of computational models for multimodal fake news detection on social media (Ajao et al., 2018;Wang et al., 2018;Khattar et al., 2019;Singhal et al., 2019), hardly any research has focused on multimodal claims (Zlatkova et al., 2019;Cheema et al., 2020b).

In this paper, we extend the definitions of claims and check-worthiness from previous work (Barrón-Cedeno et al., 2020;Nakov et al., 2021) to multimodal claim detection and introduce a novel dataset called Multimodal Claims (MM-Claims) curated from Twitter to tackle this critical problem.

While previous work has focused on factually-verifiable check-worthy (Barrón-Cedeno et al., 2020;Alam et al., 2020) or general claims (i.e., not necessarily factually-verifiable, e.g., (Gupta et al., 2021)) on a single topic, we focus on three different topics, namely COVID-19, Climate Change and Technology.

As shown in Figure 1, MM-Claims aims to differentiate between tweets without claims (Figure 1a) as well as tweets with claims of different types: claim but not check-worthy (Figure 1b), check-worthy claim (Figure 1c), and check-worthy visually relevant claim (Figure 1d).

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

• a novel dataset for multimodal claim detection in social media with more than 3000 manually annotated and roughly 82 000 unlabeled image-text tweets is introduced;

• we present details about the dataset and the annotation process, class definitions, dataset characteristics, and inter-coder agreement;

• we provide a detailed experimental evaluation of strong unimodal and multimodal models highlighting the difficulty of the task as well as the role of image and text content.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.

Section 2 describes the related work on unimodal and multimodal approaches for claim detection.

The proposed dataset and the annotation guidelines are presented in Section 3.

We discuss the experimental results of the compared models in Section 4, while Section 5 concludes the paper and outlines areas of future work.