Young people are part of social change, and they bring an impact to the betterment of the environment through recycling activities.

Incorporating gamified learning to improve recycling intention can be brought about through social influence and intrinsic and extrinsic motivations.

The elements of games like leaderboard, levels, points and rewards are significant to develop an engaging and purposeful activity to attract the youth to participate in recycling.

Based on the responses from the youths, the most prominent one is on social influences.

From the FGDs, 16 out of 29 youths think that competition and leaderboard are highly affecting peers to work towards a goal.

They are often feel challenged to perform their best to not lag far behind those with better achievements.

This factor is believed to pose a significant role in encouraging recycling intention among youths.

Besides, to further explore the relationship between gamification, motivation and recycling intention.

The quantitative research method is also a reliable way to investigate the effectiveness of gamification in recycling behaviour, as shown in Table 1.

Therefore, this leads to a higher potential for future studies on quantitative methods.

This study serves as a starting point for researchers to explore the elements influencing youths' intention and behavioural change.

The method used in this study is FGDs.

This research used inter-rater reliability on the coding agreement and the six phases of thematic analysis to reduce ambiguities and develop quality themes and frameworks that lead to wellgrounded gamified online recycling learning.

However, recycling activity requires commitment, and the two-day, twolevel activity represented a short time for attitude development.

It is hoped that with the incorporation of gamified online learning, the impact of social influence on pro-environmental awareness and recycling, similar to the achievements of Greta Thunberg and KAMY, can spread to more young people around the world.

Cultivation of recycling behaviour requires a longer-term gamified activity to effectively close the gap between fun learning and recycling intention.

OpenDans: Online Gamified Learning: Focus Group Discussion Data set, May -August 2020.

https://doi.org/10.17026/ dans-xzu-as8s.

27 This project contains the following underlying data:

• Data file 1.

(Cohen kappa reliability output in.spv format)

• Data file 2 to 6. (Focus Group Discussion Transcription in pdf.)

• Data file 7 to 10 (interrater reliability in.doc, .dat, .sav, and.sps format) In general, the paper sounds like an empirical study, but the process does not sound technically sufficiently.

Please consider the following to improve the paper:

The introduction can be better addressed by discussing the domain of study first, followed with the context of the study.

The aim of the study should be stated in the section as well.

1.

The literature review should also focus on the domain of study, showing the gap (that the study taps into).

The methods are too general and lack justification.

Some parts need strong justifications, like sampling.

The results and discussion are too brief.

Perhaps, you can focus on one factor and discuss more deeply.

Implications should compare the findings in this paper with those previously found by others.

Is the study design appropriate and is the work technically sound? Partly

If applicable, is the statistical analysis and its interpretation appropriate?

Faculty of Psychology, Universtias Negeri Jakarta, Jakarta Selatan, Indonesia I appreciate the authors for bringing a very interesting yet important research theme into the table.

The paper presented an insightful message about the potential uses of gamified based intervention to enhance youth recycling intention.

However, there are number of concerns about the way in which the paper is presented.

The following suggestions are intended to assist the authors in improving the quality of their paper.

The introduction need to be refined, there are numbers of unclear and inefficient sentences:

1) "Most countries have long ago adopted recycling to preserve the environment's health." This sentence is ambiguous, what do the authors mean by the environment's health?

This sentences also need for further grammar check.

2) The sentence in paragraph 2 "A study conducted in 2017 and 2018 shows a negative attitude towards recycling in many countries, claiming that recycling education and infrastructure are insufficient".

The authors indicated "A study" but the citation refers to two different studies.

This sentence also not clear, what do the authors mean by "a negative attitude?" please clarifiy.

1.

Table 1. needs to be clarified.

It may an idea to add study type, findings, and recommendations column for cited papers.

I also notice that some papers included in Table 1. did not clearly state the effectiveness of gamified method as a potential way to enhance people's recycling intention.

e.g. Study by Betaubun & Nasrawati (2020), which according to the author, can be used as a reference to show the use of gamified approach for enhance recycling intention, was as a cross-sectional study.

To provide strong evidences for the potential used of gamification method to enhance recycling intention, I suggest the authors to cite an experiment based publications.

As this is a qualitative study, a research question addressing the effectiveness of the program might be problematic.

Objective indicators and systematic measures should be applied to answer if the program is really effective.

Rather than testing the effectiveness, this study may focus on describing subject's subjective experiences using the program, and how their experiences benefit for developing the program.

Further, the author may describe in more detail about the game itself.

Why and how the game is delivered, e.g., duration, elements, self-guided or full-guided, online/offline, and system requirements of the program.

Braun & Clarke (2006) thematic analysis comprises series of steps when analyzing the qualitative transcriptions.

The steps including how the authors develop low-order and high order themes.

Please consider to explain the analysis steps in more detail.

The authors may need to explain in a bit more detail about the conceptual model (figure 2).

How did the authors come up with this model? What thematic analysis results lead to this model?

Suggestion to test the model using quantitative method should be added.

7.

removed the study by Betaubun & Nasrawati (2020) and replaced it with a new empirical article "Advocating recycling and encouraging environmentally friendly habits through gamification: An empirical investigation" which provides stronger evidences for the effectiveness of gamification in recycling intention.

4) I have enriched the conclusion and discussion part to show how the EGL effectively improves youths' motivation to recycle.

Social influence is emphasised in several sections of the paper.

5) 6 phases of thematic analysis have been added in 3.1 and leading each of the steps in the following sections to provide a clearer reading for the readers.

6) Additional explanation and improvement on the conceptual framework part.