In Figure 1, the study has conceptualised a framework of recycling intention initiated by gamified learning.

It was conceptualised that the youths' motivation is crucial to recycle and requires the intrinsic motivation (e.g., satisfaction, happiness or enjoyment, and extrinsic) motivation, e.g. (monetary reward, promotion or punishment) evoked from the gameful experience to influence their family and friends.

Besides, a gameful experience is also believed to directly influence youths' families and friends from the game elements that are competitive and challenging.

With the assistance of gameful experience, the youths will be motivated intrinsically and extrinsically and socially influenced the peers and family members to recycle.

There are two research questions (RQ) from the research:

1) How effective is the online gamified recycling activity towards youths' recycling intention?

2) What are the factors of recycling intention that leads to the research conceptual framework?

The qualitative study relates to the two-level online gamified recycle crafting activity, namely Edcraft Gamified Learning (EGL) activity during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown between May and September 2020.

EGL is an online gamified activity that uses game elements (levels, points, leaderboard, and rewards) to create a craft from a recyclable item, such as used plastic.

This activity involved 100 youths from three institutions, one high school and two colleges in Selangor, Malaysia, who were 16-23 years old and staying at home due to the pandemic.

Participants were recruited from their schools and colleges through the activity recruitment poster and "Word-of-Mouth" from the teachers and lecturers.

They provided written consent to participate on the day of the activity and were informed that the data would be for research and publication use.

Participants were required to undergo two days and two levels of crafting activity.

Next, participants were to watch a video tutorial about the recycling craft for a basic idea to accomplish level 1 recycling craft, and they were given a day to work on each craft freely and creatively.

The next day, participants proceeded to level 2 with the same procedure as level 1 but with a higher difficulty recycling craft.

Then, their crafts will be evaluated by art teachers and ranked on a leaderboard.

The participants who were ranked on the leaderboard will receive certificates and prizes.

After experiencing two-level EGL, 29 students were purposively selected as FGD participants.

Participants with excellent achievement, commitment and attention to the activity were selected for the FGD.

Figure 2 shows the overview of the EGL activity flow.