Machine translation is a complex task which requires diverse linguistic knowledge.

The seemingly straightforward translation of the English pronoun it into German requires knowledge at the syntactic, discourse and world knowledge levels for proper pronoun coreference resolution (cr).

The German third person pronoun can have three genders, determined by its antecedent: masculine (er), feminine (sie) and neuter (es).

Previous work (Hardmeier and Federico, 2010;Miculicich Werlen and Popescu-Belis, 2017;Müller et al., 2018) proposed evaluation methods for pronoun translation.

This has been of special interest in context-aware nmt models that are capable of using discourse-level information.

Despite promising results (Bawden et al., 2018;Müller et al., 2018;Lopes et al., 2020), the question remains: Are transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) truly learning this task, or are they exploiting simple heuristics to make a coreference prediction?

To empirically answer this question, we extend ContraPro (Müller et al., 2018)-a contrastive challenge set for automatic English→German pronoun translation evaluation-by making small adversarial changes in the contextual sentences.

Our adversarial attacks on ContraPro show that context-aware transformer nmt models can easily be misled by simple and unimportant changes to the input.

However, interpreting the results obtained from adversarial attacks can be difficult.

The results indicate that nmt uses brittle heuristics to solve cr, but it is not clear what those heuristics are.

In general, it is challenging to design attacks based on modifying ContraPro that can test specific phenomena that may be of interest.

The cat and the actor were hungry.

It (?) was hungrier.

Step 1: Markable Detection

The cat and the actor were hungry.

It (?) was hungrier.

Step 2: Coreference Resolution

The cat and the actor were hungry.

It ( ) was hungrier.

Step 3: Language Translation Der Schauspieler und die Katze waren hungrig.

Er / Sie ( ) / Es war hungriger.

Table 1: A hypothetical cr pipeline that sequentially resolves and translates a pronoun.

For this reason, we propose an independent set of templates for coreferential pronoun translation evaluation to systematically investigate which heuristics are being used.

Inspired by previous work on cr (Raghunathan et al., 2010;Lee et al., 2011), we create a number of templates tailored to evaluating the specific steps of an idealized cr pipeline.

We call this collection Contracat ( ), Contrastive Coreference Analytical Templates.

The templates are constructed in a completely controlled manner, enabling us to easily create large number of coherent test examples and provide strong conclusions about the cr capabilities of nmt.

The procedure we used in creating the templates can be adapted to many language pairs with little effort.

Our results suggest that transformer models do not learn each step of a hypothetical cr pipeline.

We also present a simple data augmentation approach specifically tailored to pronoun translation.

The experimental results show that this approach improves scores and robustness on some of our metrics, but it does not fundamentally change the way cr is being handled by nmt.

We publicly release Contracat and the adversarial modifications to ContraPro1 .