Our work covers the carbon cost and diversity gain associated with conferences in the ACL Anthology.

We consider that it is timely to perform this analysis, given the shutdown in physical meetings brought on by the global COVID-19 pandemic and have focussed our analysis on conferences from before the pandemic began.

We have made a number of assumptions in our Figure 9: Diversity of events held on each continent between 1965 and 2019. '@' refers to journals.

Africa is not represented due to the lack of events there in the ACL Anthology.

work.

Most notably, we have assumed that only first authors travel from the location of their institution to the location of the conference (and back) without detour via the easiest means of transport available to them.

Our assumptions are consistent between events and as such, our methodology gives a useful tool for comparing potential climate impact in the field of NLP and beyond.

Figure 2 shows that whilst the diversity index has grown consistently from 1970 to 2014, it has dropped since then, with 2020 having the lowest diversity index since 2008.

We cannot give an explanation for the drop over this period without speculating, however tracking this index will allow us to measure the change in diversity over the coming years.

Whereas previous work has claimed that nonphysical venues promote diversity (Raby and Madden, 2021), our research broadens the picture, with Figure 8 demonstrating that whilst some events are below the mean diversity index of online journals, many are above; in particular LREC and RANLP attract an audience from many countries.

We chose not to make a direct comparison between in-person events and the pandemic-era online conferences of 2020 and 2021, since some events of the latter type were (at the point of submission) advertised as physical meetings, while others were in the hybrid format.

However, extending our analysis to pure online and hybrid events is a clear direction for future work.

We were also able to quantify the carbon cost of travelling to physical events in terms of CO2equivalent.

Whilst this has unsurprisingly grown with the growth of the NLP field, the average carbon cost per paper has remained stable, indicating that gains in efficiency from better modes of transport are offset by an increased travel distance.

The total emissions in recent years has been as high as 6,000 tonnes of CO2-equivalent.

It must also be noted that other activities of NLP research contribute to the total carbon cost generated by the NLP field.

For example, the carbon cost of all travel in a single year of NLP research equates to about 22 fully optimised transformer models trained from scratch (see Table 1).

We must also address the carbon cost of research, as well as considering the cost of flying to conferences.

Measuring the diversity impact contributed by a conference happening in a certain place is not possible directly, since we cannot know, who would participate, if the event took place elsewhere.

However, our data indicate a preference for local events, which is the highest in low-income countries.

Holding conferences across the globe allows researchers from diverse locations to attend an event without flying as far as in a scenario where all conferences were located in one region (as was the case in the early days of the ACL conferences).

However, there is a cautionary tale to tell in our data relating to the year 2018.

In Figure 5, a large spike on the right hand side corresponds to 2018, when a total of over 6 thousand tonnes of CO2-equivalent was attributed to conference travel.

In this year the ACL annual meeting was held in Melbourne, Australia and LREC was held in Miyazaki, Japan.

The effect of this is clear as researchers from Europe and North America -who usually attend these conferences -needed to travel further, increasing the emissions.

Holding conferences in different locations will only lead to increased diversity if these events are advertised to and attended by a majority of people from the region they are held in.

Our definition of diversity index only takes into account the countries from which authors have attended, and does not measure other important factors of diversity (gender, race, economic status, native language, etc.).

Whilst some of this information may be discernable from our data, most of it would only be possible to discover by author disclosure, which was not possible in our context.

Reporting on the country-based diversity allows us to better understand the diversity of NLP research across the last 50 years.

Our work is designed as a focussed study on the ACL anthology, and a similar analysis of a broader scope (e.g., all computer science, all science publications) would yield results allowing comparisons between disciplines.

We were able to perform this analysis due to the provision of the ACL Anthology, which only covers papers in our field.

Whilst other resources indexing AI and wider computer science, or even generic scientific literature, do exist (e.g., DBLP, Google Scholar, repositories such as OpenAire, event websites etc.), these each have their own limitations, such as not including PDF links (only DOIs which point to journal websites), lack of a public API or covering only a subset of the literature.

Event websites are a fruitful source for data mining, but each event has its own bespoke format and extracting data this way is slow.

We have attempted to give a view of the data that allows policy makers to make informed decisions on where the next NLP conference should be.

We have also made our data available to facilitate future research.

Policy makers may wish to consider the high emissions impact of locating a conference in an area far away from the typical attendance base, and also weigh this against the potential diversity gain of locating a conference in a lower-wealth area.

We expect that conference organisers will make different decisions based on the relative importance of the above factors to their communities.

Table 2 shows the Kg of CO2-equivalent per passenger used in our calculations to train a univariate linear regression model for historic prediction.

To produce Figure 4, we selected specific conferences that we denoted as either local, regional or international.

Conferences were selected if they had a specific identifier in the ACL Anthology.

The pythonic regular expressions used to match the identifiers and the categorisation of each conference is provided in Table 3.

We also used these identifiers to produce the table of travel maps in the supplementary material.