Language-Agnostic Meta-Learning For Low-Resource Text-To-Speech With Articulatory Features

Abstract

Introduction

Input Representations

Character Embeddings The simplest approach to representing text as input to a TTS is using indexes of graphemes to look up embeddings.

This is however prone to mistakes.

Taylor and Richmond (2020) bring up the example of coathanger.

If the TTS is not aware of the morpheme boundary between the coat and the hang, it will be inclined to produce something like [k2T@InÃ@] rather than the correct [koUthaeN@].

Such a representation of the input will be highly language dependent, since special pronunciation rules rarely hold for more than a single language.

The textual input can be augmented by adding information, such as morpheme boundaries, intona-tion phrase boundaries derived from e.g. syntactic parsing as is done in many TTS frontends (Schröder and Trouvain, 2003;Clark et al., 2007;Ebden and Sproat, 2015), or even the semantic identity of the word a character belongs to, using e.g. BERT embeddings (Hayashi et al., 2019).

Phoneme Embeddings Rather than looking up embeddings for graphemes, it is often beneficial to use embeddings of phonemes.

Phonemizers (Bisani and Ney, 2008;Taylor, 2005;Rao et al., 2015) produce a sequence of phonetic units, which correlate with the segments in the audio much more than raw text.

One such standard of phonetic representation which we make use of is the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA).

Using this set of phonetic units alleviates the problems of TTS fine-tuning and transfer-learning to low-resource domains, because the phonetic units should be mostly language independent.

Deri and Knight (2016) provide a data driven approach for the grapheme to phoneme conversion task, which performs well on over 500 languages and can be adapted fairly easily to any new low-resource language.

There remains however one major challenge: The use of different phoneme sets for each language, leading to completely unseen units in inference or fine-tuning data.

Latent Representations Li et al. (2019a) claim that multilinguality in speech recognition and TTS can be achieved by changing the input to a latent representation that is trained across languages.

While their results seem very promising, their technique needs training data in all languages it should be applied to, which rules out zero-shot settings.

Articulatory Features We fix the shortcoming of not being able to handle unseen phonemes by specifying phonemes in terms of articulatory features such as position (e.g. frontness of the tongue) and category (e.g. voicedness).

We show that systems trained on this input can produce a phoneme given nothing but an articulatory description and thus generalize to unseen phonemes.

This makes the transfer of knowledge across languages much simpler.

A similar approach for the purpose of handling codeswitching has been done in Staib et al. (2020).

Our work builds on top of theirs by extending the idea to transfer learning an entire TTS in a new language with minimal data, making use of meta learning on top of articulatory features.

Model Agnostic Meta Learning (Maml)

Approach

System Description

For the implementation of our method, we use the open source IMS Toucan speech synthesis toolkit, first introduced in (Lux et al., 2021), which is in turn based on the ESPnet end-to-end speech processing toolkit (Watanabe et al., 2018;Hayashi et al., 2020Hayashi et al., , 2021)).

Neekhara et al. (2021) show, that it is beneficial to fine-tune a single-speaker model to a new speaker rather than to train a multispeaker model.

Inspired by this, we decided to also use a model that is not conditioned on speakers or on languages rather than a conditioned multispeaker multi-lingual model and fine-tune it on the data from a new speaker in a new language.

In preliminary experimentation we got similar results to them within one language, but found their method to not work across languages.

In comparison to the fine-tuning of a simple single speaker model, we found training and fine-tuning a model conditioned on language embeddings and speaker embeddings much more sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters.

Figure 1 shows an overview of our system, underlining how it is not specific to a certain archi- tecture, but could instead be used in conjunction with almost all modern TTS methods.

Tacotron 2 For our implementation of Tacotron 2 (Shen et al., 2018), we make use of the forward attention with transition agent introduced in Zhang et al. ( 2018), which uses a CTC-like forward variable (Graves et al., 2006) to promote the quick learning of monotonic alignment between text and speech.

To further help with this, we make use of the guided attention loss introduced in Tachibana et al. (2018).

FastSpeech 2 To train the parallel FastSpeech 2 model (Ren et al., 2020), annotations of durations for each phoneme are needed.

These also have to be generated for the low-resource fine-tuning data.

To that end, we generate alignments using the encoder-decoder attention map of a Tacotron 2 model.

Following Kim et al. (2020); Shih et al. (2021); Badlani et al. (2021), we apply the Viterbi algorithm to find the most probable monotonic path through the attention map, which significantly improves the quality of the alignments.

This is especially important, because we train our FastSpeech 2 model with pitch and energy labels that are averaged over the duration of each individual phoneme to allow for great controllability during inference, as is introduced by Łańcucki (2021).

Incorrect alignments would lead to followup errors such as an unnaturally flat prosody.

Furthermore, we make use of the conformer block (Gulati et al., 2020) as the encoder and decoder, rather than the standard transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017).

Articulatory Vectors

PanPhon The PanPhon resource (Mortensen et al., 2016) can be used to get linguistic specifications of phonemes.

It comes with an open-source tool2 which we use to convert phonemes into numeric vectors.

Each vector encodes one feature per dimension and takes the value of either -1, 0 or 1, putting the features on a scale wherever meaningful.

This featureset also includes phonological features which go beyond simple phonetics, such as whether a phoneme is syllabic.

Papercup Additionally we make use of the purely articulatory description system of phonemes introduced in Staib et al. ( 2020), which we will call Papercup features in the following.

For the encoding we use one-hot vectors, similar to their implementation.

Some of the features, like openness or frontness, should be on a scale rather than one-hot encoded.

However since the articulatory vector is fed into a fully connected layer, we leave the reconstruction of this dependency between features for the network to learn.

Language Agnostic Meta Learning

We find that the standard implementation of MAML does not work well for the TTS task.

The inner loop needs hundreds of updates in order to make a significant change to the performance of the task specific model.

This is probably due to the TTS task being a one-to-many mapping task, where the loss function of measuring the distance to a spectrogram is not an accurate objective for the TTS.

For every text, there are infinitely many spectrograms, which could be considered gold data.

Those spectrograms could differ in e.g. the speaker who reads the text and how they read the text.

Since there are no conditioning signals, the TTS has to update its parameters towards a certain speaker's characteristics in general.

However because in our case each task is a different language and a different speaker, the training becomes highly unstable.

So ideally we would either need to run MAML's inner loop until convergence, which is generally infeasible, or stabilize the procedure by not allowing the model to adapt further to one task than to the others.

To fix this issue, we calculate the Meta Model's loss on one batch per language.

We then sum up the losses, backpropagate and update the Meta Model directly using Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015).

This stabilizes the learning procedure, but still allows the model to update its parameters towards a more universal configuration.

Since we have to make this simplification to MAML in order to deal with the different languages as tasks, we call this procedure language agnostic meta learning (LAML).

Ultimately, the model should not care about the language it is fine-tuned in, since it should be close to a universal representation of an acoustic model.

To give an exact notion of our modifications: We simplified equation 1 to equation 2, where opt is a gradient descent update, B i is a batch sampled from task i, L is an objective function, Θ is the set of parameters from the Meta Model and θ i is the set of parameters specific to task i. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to successfully apply MAML to TTS with languages being the tasks.

for t steps do:

Θ t = opt Θ t-1 , ∇ i L (θ i,d , B i )

where θ i,d=0 = Θ t-1 and for d steps do:

θ i,d = opt (θ i,d-1 , ∇L (θ i,d-1 , B i ))(1)

for t steps do:

Θ t = opt Θ t-1 , ∇ i L (Θ t-1 , B i )(2)

4 Experiments

In this section we will go over the experiments we conducted.

First we will evaluate the articulatory features on their own in a single language setting using automatic measures.

Then we will evaluate the combination of LAML and articulatory features in a cross-lingual setting using both automatic measures and human evaluation.

In our experiments we make use of the following datasets: The English Nancy Krebs dataset (16h) from the Blizzard challenge 2011 (Wilhelms-Tricarico et al., 2011;King and Karaiskos, 2011); The German dataset of the speaker Karlsson (29h) from the HUI-Audio-Corpus-German (Puchtler et al., 2021); The Greek (4h), Spanish (24h), Finnish (11h), Russian (21h), Hungarian (10h), Dutch (14h) and French (19h) subsets of the CSS10 dataset (Park and Mulc, 2019).

Mono-Lingual Experiments

Embedding Function Design

To explore our first hypothesis, we investigate the capabilities of the articulatory phoneme representations to be used in a single-speaker and singlelanguage TTS system.

To compare different ways of embedding the features, we train only the embedding function.

As gold data we use the embeddings from a well trained lookup-table based Tacotron 2 model.

In table 1 we show the average distances of all articulatory vectors as projected by the embedding function to their identity based embedding counterpart.

The distance d between two embedding vectors A and B is defined in equation 3.

d = i |A i -B i | - i A i • B i i A 2 i • i B 2 i

(3) This distance function is also used as the objective function.

The embedding functions are each trained for 3000 epochs using Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with a batchsize of 32.

The first column shows the results of the articulatory features being fed into a linear layer that projects them into a 512 dimensional space.

The second column shows the results of the articulatory features being fed into a linear layer that projects them into a 100 dimensional space, applies the tanh activation function and then further projects them into a 512 dimensional space.

As can be seen from the results, it is beneficial to both concatenate the PanPhon features with the Papercup features despite their overlap and to add a nonlinearity into the embedding function to match the embeddingspace of a well trained

Convergence Time

To investigate the impact that the articulatory features have on their own, we train a Tacotron 2 with and without them on the Nancy dataset and compare their training time and final quality.

While the model trained on embedding tables shows a clear diagonal alignment of text and spectrogram frames on an unseen test sentence after 2,000 steps, the one trained on articulatory features does so already at 500 steps.

This is visualized in figure 2.

The decoder of the Tacotron 2 model can only start to learn to decode after the alignment of inputs to outputs is learned.

So learning the alignment earlier gives the articulatory model a clear benefit.

After training for 80,000 steps however, our own subjective assessment finds no difference in quality between the two.

The earlier convergence of the alignment however shows a possible advantage of using the articulatory features on low-resource tasks, as quicker training progress means that training can be stopped earlier, before overfitting on little data becomes too problematic.

Cross-Lingual Experiments

Intelligibility

To compare intelligibility between our baseline models and our low-resource models, we use the word error rate (WER) of an automatic speech recognition system (ASR) as a proxy.

We synthesize 100 sentences of German radio news texts taken from the DIRNDL corpus (Eckart et al., 2012) with each of our baselines and corresponding low-resource systems.

Table 2 shows WERs that the German IMS-Speech ASR (Denisov and Vu, 2019) achieves on the synthesized data.

For both Tacotron 2 and the FastSpeech 2 based system, the WER of the low-resource model is slightly lower than that of the baseline, thus the low-resource models performed slightly better.

Looking into the cases where the low-resource WER Baseline Low-Resource Tacotron 2 13.1% 12.7% FastSpeech 2 9.9% 9.7%

Table 2: WER of the synthesis systems on 100 radio news texts measured using the IMS-Speech ASR.

system outperformed the baseline, we find codeswitched segments, where the texts contain names of Russian cities.

Since the pretraining data of the low-resource model includes Russian speech, it seems to have not forgotten entirely about what it has seen in the pretraining phase, which in our interpretation confirms the effectiveness of the LAML against the catastrophic-forgetting problem (French, 1999) of regular pretraining.

Naturalness

In order to assess the naturalness of the fine-tuned models, we conduct a preference study with 34 native speakers of German.

Each participant is shown 12 phonetically balanced samples produced by the Tacotron 2 and FastSpeech 2 models.

For every sentence, there is one sample produced by the baseline and one by the low-resource model.

The participants are then asked to indicate their subjective overall preference between the two samples.

The results for Tacotron 2 are shown in figure 3 (a).

The low-resource system was the preferred system in more than half of the cases, with an equal rating taking up more than another third, showing a clear preference for the low-resource model over the baseline.

The results for FastSpeech 2, as seen in figure 3 (b), are a lot more balanced.

While the baseline is preferred more often than the lowresource variant, it is not the case in the majority of the ratings.

In 56% of the cases, the model finetuned on 30 minutes of data was perceived to be as good or better than the model trained on 29 hours.

Computational Resources All models were trained on a single NVIDIA A6000 GPU.

Training the Tacotron Baseline took 2 days.

Training time of the FastSpeech Baseline was 1 day.

Training time of the meta-checkpoint was 4 days, finetuning to a new model from the meta-checkpoint however only takes 2 hours.

The HiFi-GAN vocoder used to generate all samples took 4 days to train and was not fine-tuned on the unseen data.

We did not perform hyperparameter searches and used the suggested default settings for all methods, which worked sufficiently well, but could surely be improved.

Further Analysis And Future Work

Conclusion

Figure 1: Overview of the TTS pipeline we use.

The top row shows the modality in which the data is at this point in the pipeline.

The lower row shows the methods that handle the transitions.

Each of the blocks in the lower row can be exchanged easily with other methods that have the same interfaces.

(a) Proposed Tacotron 2 with articulatory features at 500 steps with a batchsize of 32. (b) Baseline Tacotron 2 with embedding-lookup at 2000 steps with a batchsize of 32.

Figure 2: The first instance of diagonal encoder-decoder attention on an unseen test sentence.

Figure 3: Results of the preference study comparing a low-resource model to a high-resource baseline.

Figure 4: Cosine similarity of speaker embeddings to target speaker over time.

Figure 5: t-SNE visualizations of phoneme representations, illustrating zero-shot capabilities.

Special characters are grey, consonants are blue, vowels are green, unseen consonants are red and unseen vowels are orange.

Tacotron 2 model.

Hence we use this setup in all following experiments.

Average distance of all embedded articulatory vectors to their position in an embedding space learned in a lookup-table based model.