A Neural Pairwise Ranking Model For Readability Assessment

Abstract

Introduction

A New Parallel Readability Dataset, Vikidia

En/Fr, the first of its kind in ARA research.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of related research and Section 3 describes the proposed neural pairwise ranking model.

The next two Sections ( 4 5) describe our experimental setup and discuss the results.

Section 6 summarizes our findings and discusses the limitations of this approach.

Related Work

Neural Pairwise Ranking Model

Experimental Setup

Datasets

We experimented with three English, one Spanish and one French datasets, which are described below.

All the datasets contain texts in multiple reading level versions (in a given language).

We call such grouping of a given text in multiple reading levels a slug.

We used the first two English datasets for training and testing our models, and the remaining three datasets only as test sets.

NewsEla-English (NewsEla-En): NewsEla2 provides leveled reading content, which is aligned with the common core educational standards (Porter et al., 2011), and contains texts covering grade 2 to grade 12.

It follows the Lexile (Stenner, 1996) framework to create such leveled texts.

It was first used in NLP research by Xu et al. (2015) and has been a commonly used corpus for ARA and text simplification in the recent past.

The English subset of the NewsEla dataset contains 9565 texts distributed across 1911 slugs.

Slugs may or may not contain texts for the full range of reading levels available i.e., each text does not have all reading level versions.

This consists of articles sourced from The Guardian newspaper, rewritten by teachers into three reading levels (beginner, intermediate, advanced) (Vajjala and Lučić, 2018) and has been used as a bench marking dataset for ARA in the recent past.

This dataset contains 189 slugs and 3 reading levels, summing to a total of 567 texts (each slug has one text in three versions).

NewsEla-Spanish (NewsEla-Es): This is the Spanish subset within the existing NewsEla dataset and contains 1221 texts distributed across 243 slugs and 10 reading levels.

Similar to NewsEla-En, each slug does not have all 10 levels in it.

Vikidia-En/Fr: Vikidia.org3 is a children's encyclopedia, with content targeting 8-13 year old children, in several European languages.

Our dataset contains 24660 texts distributed across 6165 slugs and 2 reading levels, for English (Vikidia-En) and French (Vikidia-Fr) respectively i.e., each text in the corpus has four versions: en, en-simple, fr and fr-simple, and there are 6165 slugs in total.

Azpiazu and Pera (2019)'s experiments used data from this source.

However, the data itself is not publicly available.

The uniqueness of the current dataset is that these are parallel, document level aligned texts in four versions -en, ensimple, fr, fr-simple.

While we did not create paragraph/sentence level alignments on the corpus, we hope that this will be a useful dataset for future English and French research on ARA and Automatic Text Simplification.

This is the first such dataset in ARA, and perhaps the first readily available French readability dataset.

It can be accessed at: https://zenodo.org/record/6327828

Classification, Regression And Ranking Models

Pairwise Ranking Training

To control for the variation in the text introduced by different topical content, the training and prediction process for the SVMRank and N P RM aggregates the text by their slug designations before forming pairwise permutations.

As a result, the pairwise permutations are constructed from the text within a slug.

Note that slug is used for training and testing the model, but isn't really required while using the model for prediction.

The trained model only takes a list of texts as inputs and returns a ranked list based on readability.

For controlling the computation time, we fixed the number of pairwise comparisons per slug (m in NPRM) to 3 levels.

i.e., In datasets with more than 3 levels per slug (NewsEla-En and NewsEla-Es) we choose texts with the highest and lowest reading levels within a slug, and sample the third text from a reading level in between.

Note that this will not affect the ability of the model to rank a list of texts where m is higher than 3.

As with all baselines, results from N P RM are obtained through 5-Fold cross validation.

Evaluation

Statistical Significance Testing

We used Wilcoxon's signed rank test (Conover, 1999), a non-parametric statistical hypothesis test to examine whether the performance differences between N P RM and other methods are statistically significant, when the metrics are close to each other.

Ranking metrics per slug from a sample per model are aggregated, and are then compared for any two models.

Technical Implementation

Non-neural machine methods used the sklearn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) library.

The HAN model is a Keras implementation4 . Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020) was used for accessing and fine-tuning BERT and mBERT based models (bertbase-uncased and bert-base-multilingual-uncased models were used).

TF-Ranking library5 (Pasumarthi et al., 2019) was used for accessing the Keras-compatible Pairwise Logistic Loss function.

SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020) was used for statistical significance testing.

The Word2vec embeddings are pre-trained on English Google News (Mikolov et al., 2013b).

The fasttext embeddings contain 1-million word vectors and are trained on subword information from Wikipedia 2017 (Bojanowski et al., 2017).

The GloVe embeddings are trained on the Wikipedia 2014 and Gigaword 5 corpus (Pennington et al., 2014).

All three are accessed through gensim6 .

Results

Classification

We trained models using Newsela-En and OSE datasets respectively in a five fold CV setup, for classification.

Table 1 shows the performance of our best performing model in terms of traditional classification metrics, comparing with the state of the art.

weighted-F1 NewsEla-En HAN (Martinc et al., 2021) 0.81 BERT 0.74 OSE HAN (Martinc et al., 2021) 0.79 BERT 0.93 BART (Lewis et al., 2020) When evaluating the classification models in terms of ranking metrics, we notice some differences among the models evaluated using NewsEla-En and OSE.

There is relatively less variation among different Newsela-En models for NDCG, compared to SRC, KTCC, and RA.

We see larger variations across OSE models for all the metrics.

It is interesting to note that the non-contextual embeddings perform competitively with BERT in terms of the ranking metrics and are all better than BERT in terms of ranking accuracy.

Overall, The NewsEla-En + BERT classifier achieves the highest average NDCG, SRC, and KTCC, and the NewsEla + fasttext + SVM combination achieves the highest ranking accuracy.

For OSE, the Glove+SVM classifier achieves the highest SRC, KTCC, and RA while fastText+HAN and BERT models achieve better scores in terms of NDCG.

All the ranking metrics in general seem to have higher scores with NewsEla-En trained models, than OSE models.

This could potentially be due to the larger dataset size, as well as the fact that NewsEla-En covers a broader reading level scale.

Although the classification models seem to generally perform well on ranking metrics too, it has to be noted that there is no inherent means within classification to distinguish between ties, where the model predicts the same class for two documents of different reading levels.

Hence, it is not feasible to continue to use classifiers as rankers.

This evaluation is to be seen only means of comparing classification, regression, and ranking with a common set of metrics.

Regression

Table 3 shows the performance of all the regression models using both regression and ranking metrics.

Although there are no other reported results of applying regression models on these datasets to our knowledge, the low MAE/MSE for both datasets indicate that regression models perform well for this problem.

Like with classification, we notice that there is no huge difference among the contextual and non-contextual embeddings in terms of the ranking metrics.

However, we notice some general differences between classification and regression approaches.

In contrast to the classification models, when holding the training data and the regressor constant, models with GloVe embeddings perform worse than models using Word2vec or fasttext in regression specific metrics.

When evaluating on ranking metrics, the regression models generally exhibit higher average NDCG, SRC and KTCC than the classification models.

Again, like with classification evaluation, the differences across models in terms of the ranking metrics is larger for OSE compared to NewsEla-En.

Overall, though, the neural regressor (regBERT) consistently performs better than the OLS regressor in terms of regression metrics, and is either comparable or better than OLS regressor in terms of all the ranking metrics.

Pairwise Ranking

Table 4 shows the performance of pairwise ranking approaches on both the training datasets.

When training on the NewsEla-En dataset, we observe that N P RM outperforms at least one word-embedding + SVMRank combination in the ranking metrics, but only achieves the top score in NDCG when compared with word-embedding SVMRank methods.

When training on the OSE dataset, N P RM achieves the top score against the word-embedding + SVMRank combinations, but only NDCG was found to be statistically significant across all models.

Comparisons between N P RM and the word-embedding + SVMRank combinations had p-values < 0.05 for NDCG.

For SRR, KTCC and RA, only the difference in scores between N P RM and fasttext + SVMRank were found to be statistically significant.

GloVe + SVM-Rank method produces the statistically equivalent scores in SRC, KTCC, and RA as N P RM .

Overall, while there is no single approach that ranked as the best uniformly across all the three model settings (Tables 234), BERT based models perform competitively with most of the ranking metrics.

Table 5  For Newsela-En, all methods reported a high score of 0.999 for NDCG and regBERT is better with the other metrics.

Testing for statistical significance between N P RM , regBERT and BERT classification showed that N P RM is significantly better than BERT classifier (p<0.05) and there is no significant difference between N P RM and reg-BERT.

For OSE, NPRM BERT achieves a better performance for all metrics.

We did not perform statistical significance testing in this case as the differences are larger.

To conclude, when training and testing from the same distribution, regBERT and NPRM BERT per-form better than BERT based classifier in terms of the ranking metrics.

Since the performance is generally expected to degrade slightly in a crosscorpus setting compared to a within corpus evaluation, the rest of our experiments will only focus on regBERT and NPRM, and we don't report further experiments with a BERT classifier.

Cross-Corpus Pair-Wise Ranking

In this experiment, we evaluated the performance of an ARA model trained with one English dataset, on other English datasets.

Since NewsEla-en is the larger dataset with more diverse reading levels, we used that for training, and used OSE and Vikidia-En as test sets.

Since regression scores can also be used to directly rank predictions, we compared the performance of NPRM with BERT based regression model.

NPRM model, trained on Newsela-En, does well with ranking both OSE and Vikidia-En texts by their reading level, and is more robust to variation among the corpora, compared to the reg-BERT model.

All measures achieve performance > 0.87 for both the datasets with N P RM .

The regBERT performs comparably on Vikidia-En, but does poorly on OSE.

While the results for N P RM are still somewhat lower in the cross-corpus evaluation than in within corpus evaluation setups, it has to be noted that this evaluation is done without any additional fine-tuning on the target datasets.

We did not test for statistical significance in this case as the numbers have large differences between regBERT and N P RM in most cases.

This experiment leads us to a conclusion that N P RM can successfully be used to rank documents on a different reading level scale too.

Zero Shot, Cross-Lingual Pair-Wise Ranking

Zero-shot cross-lingual scenario aims to evaluate whether a model trained on one language can be ef-fectively used to rank texts from another language correctly without explicitly training on the target language.

We evaluated NPRM and regBERT models trained with a multilingual BERT (mBERT) model as the base for this task.

Both the models were trained on Newsela-En dataset and evaluated on Newsela-Es and Vikidia-Fr datasets.

The mBERT7 model is pre-trained on a corpus of multilingual data from 104 languages, including all the three languages in our experiment: English, French and Spanish.

We observe that the N P RM with mBERT either performs comparably or outperforms a regression mBERT model on all metrics, for both the datasets.

Specifically, the N P RM has a performance increase of 12.3% in RA for Newsela-Es over Vikidia-Fr.

Thus, we can conclude that our pairwise ranking approach performs well even in cross-lingual scenarios, and zero-shot, crosslingual transfer can be useful to setup strong baseline models for new languages.

We can notice a lower performance on Vikidia-Fr compared to Newsela-ES.

Apart from the fact that they are different languages, it can potentially also be due to the fact that Newsela-ES has content from the same domain as Newsela-EN, whereas Vikidia-Fr has more diverse content.

It is also possible that the ranking metrics penalize Vikidia-Fr predictions more, as there are only two reading levels.

A ranking can still be scored well if most of the ranking order is correct.

However, in the case of Vikidia-Fr, an incorrect ranking levels would result in a completely reversed list, which is heavily penalized in SRC and KTCC.

Thus, small number of completely incorrectly ranked slugs can result in low SRC and KTCC scores for Vikidia-Fr, but can still result in high SRC and KTCC scores for NewsEla-ES.

More future experiments, with additional languages, would lead us towards a better understanding of what works well across languages and datasets.

Ranking Metrics : We reported four ranking metrics in these experiments.

While they all get high numbers in some experimental settings, none of them consistently seem like a better choice than others.

We observe that the large majority of the methods score close to 1.0 on NDCG.

In comparison, the SRC and KTCC, while generally quite high, appear more susceptible to poor ranking performance.

We notice that RA is lower than SRC and KTCC for OSE (Table 6) and NewsEla-Es (Table 6), but SRC and KTCC lag behind RA for Vikidia-Fr (Table 7).

We hypothesize that this could be because of the number of reading levels in the datasets.

SRC and KTCC seem more forgiving when number of reading levels are more.

Clearly, each metric addresses the evaluation of ranking differently, and as the results show, there is no single model that consistently does well across all metrics, in all the evaluations.

We hope that this illustrates the value of reporting multiple metrics while benchmarking a new model.

Future work in this direction should also focus on the evaluation of the evaluation metrics themselves for this task.

Conclusions And Discussion

Weighted-F1 for classificationIn terms of traditional classification metrics, our approach achieves a lower performance than

Ranking Metrics for Classification Evaluation

Pairwise Ranking Evaluation

presents a summary of the performance of BERT in classification, regression and ranking setups.

Classification vs Regression vs Ranking

Table 6 shows the results.

Table 7 shows the results of this experiment.

Zero-shot, cross-lingual Evaluation (Trained on Newsela-En)