Entities are integral to applications that require understanding natural language text such as semantic search (Inan et al., 2021;Lashkari et al., 2019), question answering (Chandrasekaran et al., 2020;Cheng and Erk, 2020) and knowledge base construction (Goel et al., 2021;Al-Moslmi et al., 2020).

To this end, entity set expansion (ESE) is a crucial task that uses a textual corpus to enhance a set of seed entities (e.g., 'mini bar', 'tv unit') with  new entities (e.g., 'coffee', 'clock') that belong to the same semantic concept (e.g., room features).

Since training data in new domains is scarce, many existing ESE methods expand a small seed set by learning to rank new entity candidates with limited supervision.

Broadly speaking, there are two types of such low-resource ESE methods: (a) corpus-based methods (Shen et al., 2018;Huang et al., 2020a;Yu et al., 2019a) that bootstrap the seed set using contextual features and patterns, and (b) language model-based methods (Zhang et al., 2020a) that probe a pre-trained language model with prompts to rank the entity candidates.

Despite the recent progress, reported success of ESE methods is largely limited to benchmarks focusing on named entities (e.g., countries, diseases) and well-written text such as Wikipedia.

Furthermore, the evaluation is limited to top 10-50 predictions regardless of the actual size of the entity set.

As a result, it is unclear whether the reported effectiveness of ESE methods is conditional to datasets, domains, and/or evaluation methods.

In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive study to investigate the generalizability of ESE methods in low-resource settings.

Specifically, we focus on domains with user-generated text such as reviews.

User-generated text data is abundant and is largely unlabeled.

Enabling NLP applications including semantic search and question answering (Li et al., 2019;Bhutani et al., 2020;Dai and Song, 2019) over user-generated text requires entities mined from these largely unlabeled data.

Furthermore, user-generated text has distinctive characteristics than well-written text, making it appropriate for this study.

Due to lack of benchmarks on usergenerated text, we create new benchmarks from three domains -hotels, restaurants and jobs.

We found that these benchmarks exhibit characteristics (illustrated in Figure 1) distinct from existing benchmarks: (a) multifaceted entities (entities that belong to multiple concepts -e.g., 'venice beach' can belong to concepts location and nearby attractions); (b) non-named entities (entities that are typically noun phrases but not proper names -e.g., 'coffee'); and (c) vague entities (human annotators have subjective disagreement on their concept labels -e.g., 'casino' for nearby attraction).

We explain why these characteristics emerge in user-generated text in Section 3.

We found that user-generated text can have up to 10× more multifaceted entities and 2× more nonnamed entities compared to well-curated benchmarks.

Furthermore, concepts that do not have well-defined semantics result in vague entities.

We use these characteristics to profile ESE methods, showing that the performance difference between well-curated and user-generated text can partially be attributed to these characteristics.

Contributions.

To summarize, our key contributions include: a) identifying and verifying several important new characteristics in user-generated text that are not explored in evaluation of existing ESE methods, b) constructing three new usergenerated text benchmarks (we publicly release two 1 ), c) proposing new metrics for evaluating ESE methods, d) deriving insights through a crossdomain (user-generated text vs. well-curated) comparison study on different ESE methods.

Key findings.

Our main findings are listed below: