Research on task-oriented dialogue (ToD) systems (Levin and Pieraccini, 1995;Young et al., 2002) has become a key aspect in industry: e.g., ToD is used to automate telephone customer service tasks ranging from hospitality over healthcare to banking (Raux et al., 2003;Young, 2010;El Asri et al., 2017).

Typical ToD systems still rely on a modular design: (i) the natural language understanding Yes, I need this card to arrive before 3pm on Jan 14 (NLU) module maps user utterances into a domainspecific set of intent labels and values (Rastogi et al., 2019;Heck et al., 2020;Dai et al., 2021), followed by (ii) the policy module, which makes decisions based on the information extracted by the NLU (Gašić et al., 2012;Casanueva et al., 2017;Lubis et al., 2020;Wang et al., 2020a) The NLU module is a critical part of any ToD system, as it must extract the relevant information from the user's utterances.

The information relevance is denoted by the structured dialogue domain ontology, which enables the policy module to make decisions about next system actions.

The domain ontology covers the information on 1) intents and 2) slots, see Figure 1.

The former is aimed at extracting general conversational ideas (i.e., the user's intents) and corresponds to the standard NLU task of intent detection (ID); the latter extracts specific slot values and corresponds to the NLU task of slot labeling (SL) (Gupta et al., 2019).

1In order to make the policy operational and tractable, NLU should extract only the minimal information required by the policy.

Therefore, the ontologies differ for each domain of ToD application and are typically built from scratch for each domain.

Consequently, this makes domain-relevant NLU data extremely expensive to collect and annotate, and prevents its reusability (Budzianowski et al., 2018).

Due to this, NLU research in recent years has heavily focused on very data-efficient models that can effectively operate in low-data regimes.

Current state-of-the-art (SotA) NLU models leverage large pretrained language models (PLMs) (Devlin et al., 2019;Liu et al., 2019c;Henderson et al., 2020) and fine-tune them with small task-specific datasets (Larson et al., 2019b;Casanueva et al., 2020;Coucke et al., 2018) At the same time, the progress in creation of NLU datasets has not kept up with the impressive pace of NLU methodology development.

However, designing domain ontologies and NLU datasets is also critical for steering further progress in NLU, both from methodology and application perspective.

Put simply, current publicly available NLU datasets do not keep up to date with current industry/application requirements for many reasons.

1) They are usually crowdsourced by untrained annotators (thus typically optimised for quantity rather than quality), yielding examples with low lexical diversity and prone to annotation errors.

2) They typically assume one intent per example, and thus enable only much simpler single-label ID experiments; such setups are not realistic in more complex industry settings (see Figure 1 again) and lead to unnecessarily large intent sets.

3) Their ontologies are tied to specific domains, making it difficult to reuse already available annotated data in other domains.

4) The complexity of the defined tasks and ontologies is limited; the undesired artefact is that current NLU datasets might overestimate the NLU models' abilities, and are not able to separate models any more performance-wise.

2 2 For instance, for some standard and commonly used NLU datasets such as ATIS (Hemphill et al., 1990;Xu et al., 2020) and SNIPS (Coucke et al., 2018), the results of SotA models are all in the region of 97-98 F1, with new models getting statistically insignificant gains which might be due to overfitting to the test set or even some remaining annotation errors.

In order to address all these gaps, we introduce NLU++, a novel NLU dataset which provides highquality NLU data annotated by dialogue experts.

NLU++ provides multi-intent, slot-rich and semantically varied NLU data, and is inspired by a number of NLU challenges which ToD systems typically face in production environments.

Unlike previous ID datasets, examples are annotated with multiple labels, named intent modules3 (see Table 1), with some examples naturally obtaining even up to 6-7 labels.

These labels can be seen as sub-intent annotations, where their combinations yield full intents equivalent to "traditional" intents (Table 1).

In addition, NLU++ defines a rich set of slots which are combined with the multi-intent sentences.

NLU++ is divided into two domains (BANKING and HOTELS) where the two domain ontologies blend a set of domain-specific intents and slots with a set of generic (i.e., domain-universal) intents and slots.

This design makes a crucial step towards generalisation and data reusability in NLU.

Finally, we run a series of experiments on NLU++ with current SotA ID and SL models, demonstrating the challenging nature of NLU++ and ample room for future improvement, especially in low-data setups.

Our benchmark comparisons also demonstrate strong performance and shed new light on the (ability of) recently emerging QA-based NLU models (Namazifar et al., 2021;Fuisz et al., 2022), and warrant further research on ToD NLU.

The NLU++ dataset is available at: github.com/PolyAI-LDN/ task-specific-datasets.