The aim of this study was to systematically examine feature-based SRF models, fleshing out what features make the models work best.

By evaluating different feature sets of the computational SRF studies from a linguistic perspective, we tried to build a bridge between the features employed by computational models and the linguistic explanations behind those features.

Based on the results of the two feature selection experiments conducted on seven feature sets, and the approach outlined in section 4.5.2, we composed a consensus set consisting of six features from 4 classes: animacy and plurality [Inherent features of a referent], grammatical role of the current mention, form of the antecedent, and categorical distance in number of sentences [recency].

Comparing the consensus set with the previously proposed feature sets has interesting implications for both feature-based SRF research and linguistics.

Implications for feature-based SRF studies: We found that by using a smaller set of features, models can often achieve nearly identical performance.

For example, as shown in Table 9, the performance of the Kibrik model using 17 features is 0.793, but we can achieve an accuracy of 0.776 using only 6 features.

Furthermore, using the largest number of features does not guarantee the best possible performance: the results in Table 9 show that the performance of a subset is often similar to that of a superset.

In the case of 2 feature sets, OSU and IS-G, the performance of one of the subsets was even better than the original.

We saw in Table 5 that all systems except ICSI encode recency in one way or the other.

Some encode recency in terms of "lower-level" units such as counting words, NPs and markables; others focus on "higher-level" units such as sentences and paragraphs.

The two experiments show the higher-level metrics are always ranked more highly than the lower-level ones.

Clearly, features encoding similar concepts (e.g. distance to the antecedent) do not always contribute equally to a model.

The same holds for referential status, where sentence-level features play a much more important role than the others.

Implications for linguistics: In section 3.1, we grouped the features that were used by the systems that we studied into 9 broad categories.

The 6 features that we chose (above) as our consensus set are all from only 4 of these 9, namely grammatical role, inherent features of the referent, antecedent form and recency.

• Inherent features: We showed that two inherent features of a referent, namely animacy and plurality, i.e. whether the referent is plural or singular, play major roles in predicting the referential choice.

Given the linguistics literature, the importance of animacy is no great surprise; for example, Fukumura and van Gompel (2011) reported that pronouns were more frequent for referring to animate than inanimate referents.

More of a surprise is the role of plurality for SRF which has attracted less attention.

The psycholinguistics literature suggests that when conjoined noun phrases are introduced into the discourse, they are treated as a group, and the group is in focus, which makes it prominent (Patson and Warren, 2011).

According to Gordon et al. (1999)'s repeated name penalty, referring to a prominent referent with a proper name instead of a pronoun increases the processing time.

An implication of this is the possibility that including the plurality feature in a prediction task might facilitate the pronoun detection.

• Grammatical role: Various studies, including centering-based research, tend to emphasize that referents in subject position have a higher tendency to be pronominalized in the subsequent sentence (Brennan et al., 1987;Brennan, 1995;Kaiser, 2010).

The focus of previous research has usually been on the subjecthood of the antecedent, and less so on the subjecthood of the current mention.

Our analysis suggests that the grammatical role of the current mention is more important than that of the antecedent in predicting the choice of referential form.

• Antecedent form: In this case, our findings match those in the linguistic tradition (Gundel and Hedberg, 2008).

This factor could be important either because people tend to avoid consecutive uses of the same expression (Bohnet, 2008), or because having a pronominal antecedent enhances the prominence of the referent (Kaiser, 2003).

• Recency: Recency, in the linguistic tradition, has often been emphasized, but often without a clear definition.

Our study suggests that recency is best defined in terms of the number of sentences that intervene between the antecedent and the current mention; next best is recency metric defined in terms of the number of paragraphs.

This finding is in line with the linguistic tradition, which tend to focus on "higher level" measures (Fox, 1987;Tomlin, 1987;McCoy and Strube, 1999;Henschel et al., 2000;Arnold et al., 2009).

This concludes our comparison of different feature-based computational studies of referential choice.

In view of the above observations, we hope that computational and theoretical studies of language will continue to provide inspiration to each other.