In this paper, we proposed a novel supervised contrastive learning approach for language understanding.

To utilize the class labels sufficiently, we devise three novel contrastive objectives, including a multi-head instance-centered contrastive loss, a label-centered contrastive loss, and a label embedding regularizer.

Extensive experiments were conducted on eight public datasets from GLUE and CLUE benchmarks, showing the competitiveness of LaCon against various strong baselines.

Besides, we also demonstrate the strong capacity of LaCon on more challenging few-shot and data imbalance settings, which leads up to 9.4% improvement on the FewGLUE and FewCLUE benchmarks.

LaCon does not require any complicated network architecture or any extra data augmentation, and can be easily plugged into mainstream pre-trained language models.

In the future, we will explore more advanced representation fusion approaches to enhance the capability of LaCon and plan to extend LaCon to the computer vision and speech fields.

In this section, we supplement more ablation results by adding each proposed CL loss cumulatively.

We conduct experiments on MRPC, RTE, and CoLA datasets and keep the setting consistent with Section 3.4.

Table 6 demonstrates that the contribution of each component in more details.

We supplement more experimental results on the remaining datasets of GLUE and CLUE benchmarks.

We follow the same experimental setup with Section 3.1.

Please note that SST-B is a regression task that is beyond the capacity of the proposed La-Con.

The official CLUE benchmark has replaced CMNLI with OCNLI dataset, and the CSL dataset is a keyword recognition task, which is not suitable for our proposed model.

Thus, we omit the experiments on above three datasets and report the performance on the remaining language understanding tasks including SST-2, MNLI, AFQMC, OCNLI and IFLYTEK.

Table 7 shows that, LaCon-vanilla consistently outperforms BERT fine-tuned with CE, and LaConfusion still beats the baselines among all datasets, which further demonstrates the superiority of our proposed method.

In this section, we conduct the theoretical analysis to prove the rationality and necessity of our proposed ICL and LCL losses.

We also explain why these two losses are complementary.

Finally, we analyze the computational efficiency of ICL and LCL compared to InfoNCE (van den Oord et al., 2018) and SCL (Khosla et al., 2020).

The recent researches (Li et al., 2020;Gao et al., 2019) reveal that the anisotropy problem of pretrained language models, which shows that the learnt embeddings occupy a narrow cone in the dense vector space, harming the uniformity of the models and limiting the representation capacity.

The singular values of the contextual embeddings decay drastically with most of them nearly zeros (Wang and Isola, 2020).

CL is proposed to eliminate the long-tail distribution problem of singular values, aiming to enhance the representation capacity (Gao et al., 2021;Yan et al., 2021;Gunel et al., 2021).

From the spectrum perspective (Wang et al., 2020;Wang and Isola, 2020)  Table 7: Performance on the remaining datasets of GLUE and CLUE.

Baseline* means the best performance of our baselines.

The evaluation metrics are the same as the official GLUE (Wang et al., 2019) and CLUE (Xu et al., 2020) benchmarks (all with significance value p < 0.05).

models.

Therefore, we can form an asymptotic equivalent objective of the L ICL (Equation 3) as Equation 10.

(x, y) ∼ A(y) denotes instances (i.e. x) with corresponding label (i.e. y) and y -denotes the label that is different from y. The first item keeps instances and corresponding labels similar and the second item pushes the mismatched instances and labels apart.

We can further derive Equation 11 using Jensen's inequality because e(.) is convex.

Therefore, minimizing the L ICL equals to minimization of summation of all elements in HL T ∈ R N ×C .

Because both H and L are normalized, tr(H T L) is a constant due to all diagonal elements are ones.

sum(HL T ) is an upper bound of the largest singular value (Merikoski, 1984) and minimization of the sum(HL T ) will flatten the singular values distribution of HL T .

As the HL T is a non-squared matrix, we need to optimize both the left and right singular values using HL T and LH T in order to effectively eliminate the anisotropy and promote the uniformity of pre-trained language models in classification tasks to enhance the model capacity.

Thus, we also need to optimize the label-centered contrastive loss L LCL at the same time.

From above analysis, we can see that L ICL and L LCL are complementary to each other.

Similarly, we can derive that minimizing L LCL results in the minimization of sum(LH T ) ∈ R C×N .

L ICL = - 1 τ E (x,

Although both ICL and LCL calculate the N ×C similarity scores for a mini-batch, they are different.

The ICL is the average of the instance-level per sample loss while the LCL is the per label loss.

The ICL intends to align each instance to corresponding label correctly.

The LCL makes the instances of different labels far away from each other and instances of the same label more compact.

They consider different aspects of instance and label representation through operating the N × C similarity scores differently according to Equation 3 and 5.

Compared to InfoNCE, ICL improves the computational efficiency from O(N 2 ) to O(N C) because we only need to contrast the instance representation with corresponding label representations for per example loss, which is extremely useful for language understanding tasks (Wang et al., 2019;Xu et al., 2020) that commonly consist of 2 or 3 labels.

Similarly, LCL is also more computationally efficient as it only contrasts one label representation to several instances rather than computes all pairs of instances belonging to a given label in the mini-batch.

Thus it improves the complexity from O(N 2 ) to O(CN ) compared with SCL too.