In this section, we survey previously used data augmentation methods for NLP tasks, grouping them into four categories:

Word replacement: Various word replacement variants have been explored for text classification tasks.

Zhang et al. (2015) and Wei and Zou (2019) replace words with one of their synonyms, retrieved from an English thesaurus (e.g., WordNet).

Kobayashi (2018) replace words with other words that are predicted by a language model at the word positions.

Xie et al. (2019) replace uninformative words with low TF-IDF scores with other uninformative words for topic classification tasks.

For machine translation, word replacement has also been used to generate additional parallel sentence pairs.

Wang et al. (2018) replace words in both the source and the target sentence by other words uniformly sampled from the source and the target vocabularies.

Fadaee et al. (2017) search for contexts where a common word can be replaced by a low-frequency word, relying on recurrent language models.

Gao et al. (2019) replace a randomly chosen word by a soft word, which is a probabilistic distribution over the vocabulary, provided by a language model.

In addition, there are two special word replacement cases, inspired by dropout and masked language modeling: replacing a word by a zero word (i.e., dropping entire word embeddings) (Iyyer et al., 2015), or by a [MASK] token (Wu et al., 2018).

Mention replacement: Raiman and Miller (2017) augment a question answering training set using an external knowledge base.

In particular, they extract nominal groups in the training set, perform string matching with entities in Wikidata, and then randomly replace them with other entities of the same type.

In order to remove gender bias from coreference resolution systems, Zhao et al. (2018) propose to generate an auxiliary dataset where all male entities are replaced by female entities, and vice versa, using a rule-based approach.

2018) use a sequence-to-sequence model to generate diversely augmented utterances to improve the dialogue language understanding module.

Xia et al. (2019) convert data from a high-resource language to a lowresource language, using a bilingual dictionary and an unsupervised machine translation model in order to expand the machine translation training set for the low-resource language.

3 Data Augmentation for NER Inspired by the efforts described in Section 2, we design several simple data augmentation methods for NER.

Note that these augmentations do not rely on any externally trained models, such as machine translation models or syntactic parsing models, which are by themselves difficult to train in low-resource domain-specific scenarios.

Label-wise token replacement (LwTR): For each token, we use a binomial distribution to randomly decide whether it should be replaced.

If yes, we then use a label-wise token distribution, built from the original training set, to randomly select another token with the same label.

Thus, we keep the original Synonym replacement (SR): Our second approach is similar to LwTR, except that we replace the token with one of its synonyms retrieved from WordNet.

Note that the retrieved synonym may consist of more than one token.

However, its BIO-labels can be derived using a simple rule: If the replaced token is the first token within a mention (i.e., the corresponding label is 'B-EntityType'), we assign the same label to the first token of the retrieved multi-word synonym, and 'I-EntityType' to the other tokens.

If the replaced token is inside a mention (i.e., the corresponding label is 'I-EntityType'), we assign its label to all tokens of the multi-word synonym.

For each mention in the instance, we use a binomial distribution to randomly decide whether it should be replaced.

If yes, we randomly select another mention from the original training set which has the same entity type as the replacement.

The corresponding BIO-label sequence can be changed accordingly.

For example, in

We first split the token sequence into segments of the same label.

Thus, each segment corresponds to either a mention or a sequence of out-of-mention tokens.

For example, the original sentence in Table 1 is split into five segments: [She did not complain of], [headache], [or], [any other neurological symptoms], [.].

Then for each segment, we use a binomial distribution to randomly decide whether it should be shuffled.

If yes, the order of the tokens within the segment is shuffled, while the label order is kept unchanged.

All: We also explore to augment the training set using all aforementioned augmentation methods.

That is, for each training instance, we create multiple augmented instances, one per augmentation method.

4 Experiments and Results