We briefly point out other relevant approaches and efforts from the vast amount of literature.

Event coreference In addition to the competitors mentioned in Section 5, approaches for event linking were presented, e.g., by Chen and Ji (2009), who determine link scores with hand-crafted compatibility metrics for event mention pairs and a maximum-entropy model, and feed these to a spectral clustering algorithm.

A variation of the eventcoreference resolution task extends the scope to cross-document relations.

Cybulska and Vossen (2015) approach this task with various classification models and propose to use a type-specific granularity hierarchy for feature values.

Lee et al. (2012) further extend the task definition by jointly resolving entity and event coreference, through several iterations of mention-cluster merge operations.

Sachan et al. (2015) describe an active-learning based method for the same problem, where they derive a clustering of entities/events by incorporating bits of human judgment as constraints into the objective function.

Araki and Mitamura (2015) simultaneously identify event triggers and disambiguate them wrt.

one another with a structured-perceptron algorithm.

Resources Besides the ACE 2005 corpus, a number of other datasets with event-coreference annotation have been presented.

Hovy et al. (2013) reports on the annotation process of two corpora from the domains of "violent events" and biographic texts; to our knowledge neither of them is publicly available.

OntoNotes (Weischedel et al., 2013) comprises different annotation layers including coreference (Pradhan et al., 2012), however intermingles entity and event coreference.

A series of releases of the EventCorefBank corpus (Bejan and Harabagiu, 2010;Lee et al., 2012;Cybulska and Vossen, 2014) combine linking of event mentions within and across documents, for which Liu et al. (2014) report a lack of completeness on the withindocument aspect.

The ProcessBank dataset (Berant et al., 2014) provides texts with event links from the difficult biological domain.

Other A few approaches to the upstream task of event extraction, while not considering withindocument event linking, still utilize discourse-level information or even cross-document inference.

For example, Liao and Grishman (2010) showed how the output of sentence-based classifiers can be filtered wrt.

discourse-level consistency.

Yao et al. (2010) resolved coreferences between events from different documents in order to make a global extraction decision, similar to (Ji and Grishman, 2008) and (Li et al., 2011).

In addition to convolutional neural networks, more types of neural architectures lend themselves to the generation of sentential features.

Recently many recursive networks and recurrent ones have been proposed for the task of relation classification, with state-of-the-art results (Socher et al., 2012;Hashimoto et al., 2013;Ebrahimi and Dou, 2015;Xu et al., 2015;Li et al., 2015).