Neural network models are quickly becoming the predominant approach to machine translation (MT).

Training neural MT (NMT) models can be done in an end-to-end fashion, which is simpler and more elegant than traditional MT systems.

Moreover, NMT systems have become competitive with, or better than, the previous state-of-the-art, especially since the introduction of sequence-to-sequence models and the attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014;Sutskever et al., 2014).

The improved translation quality is often attributed to better handling of non-local dependencies and morphology generation (Luong and Manning, 2015;Bentivogli et al., 2016;Toral and Sánchez-Cartagena, 2017).

However, little is known about what and how much these models learn about each language and its features.

Recent work has started exploring the role of the NMT encoder in learning source syntax (Shi et al., 2016), but research studies are yet to answer important questions such as: (i) what do NMT models learn about word morphology? (ii) what is the effect on learning when translating into/from morphologically-rich languages? (iii) what impact do different representations (character vs. word) have on learning? and (iv) what do different modules learn about the syntactic and semantic structure of a language?

Answering such questions is imperative for fully understanding the NMT architecture.

In this paper, we strive towards exploring (i), (ii), and (iii) by providing quantitative, data-driven answers to the following specific questions:

• Which parts of the NMT architecture capture word structure?

• What is the division of labor between different components (e.g. different layers or encoder vs. decoder)?

• How do different word representations help learn better morphology and modeling of infrequent words?

• How does the target language affect the learning of word structure?

To achieve this, we follow a simple but effective procedure with three steps: (i) train a neural MT system on a parallel corpus; (ii) use the trained model to extract feature representations for words in a language of interest; and (iii) train a classifier using extracted features to make predictions for another task.

We then evaluate the quality of the trained classifier on the given task as a proxy to the quality of the extracted representations.

In this way, we obtain a quantitative measure of how well the original MT system learns features that are relevant to the given task.

We focus on the tasks of part-of-speech (POS) and full morphological tagging.

We investigate how different neural MT systems capture POS and morphology through a series of experiments along several parameters.

For instance, we contrast word-based and character-based representations, use different encoding layers, vary source and target languages, and compare extracting features from the encoder vs. the decoder.

We experiment with several languages with varying degrees of morphological richness: French, German, Czech, Arabic, and Hebrew.

Our analysis reveals interesting insights such as:

• Character-based representations are much better for learning morphology, especially for low-frequency words.

This improvement is correlated with better BLEU scores.

On the other hand, word-based models are sufficient for learning the structure of common words.

• Lower layers of the encoder are better at capturing word structure, while deeper networks improve translation quality, suggesting that higher layers focus more on word meaning.

• The target language impacts the kind of information learned by the MT system.

Translating into morphologically-poorer languages leads to better source-side word representations.

This is partly, but not completely, correlated with BLEU scores.

• The neural decoder learns very little about word structure.

The attention mechanism removes much of the burden of learning word representations from the decoder.