Event extraction aims at detecting mentions of realworld events and their arguments in text documents of different domains, e.g., news articles.

The subsequent task of event linking is concerned with resolving coreferences between recognized event mentions in a document, and is the focus of this paper.

Several studies investigate event linking and related problems such as relation mentions spanning multiple sentences.

Swampillai and Stevenson (2010) find that 28.5 % of binary relation mentions in the MUC 6 dataset are affected, as are 9.4 % of relation mentions in the ACE corpus from 2003.

Ji and Grishman (2011) estimate that 15 % of slot fills in the training data for the "TAC 2010 KBP Slot Filling" task require cross-sentential inference.

To confirm these numbers, we analyzed the event annotation of the ACE 2005 corpus and found that approximately 23 % of the event mentions lack arguments which are present in other mentions of the same event instance in the respective document.

These numbers suggest that event linking is an important task.

Previous approaches for modeling event mentions in context of coreference resolution (Bejan and Harabagiu, 2010;Sangeetha and Arock, 2012;Liu et al., 2014) make either use of external feature sources with limited cross-domain availability like WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) and FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), or show low performance.

At the same time, recent literature proposes a new kind of feature class for modeling events (and relations) in order to detect mentions and extract their arguments, i.e., sentential features from event-/relationmention representations that have been created by taking the full extent and surrounding sentence of a mention into account (Zeng et al., 2014;Nguyen and Grishman, 2015;Chen et al., 2015;dos Santos et al., 2015;Zeng et al., 2015).

Their promising results motivate our work.

We propose to use such features for event coreference resolution, hoping to thereby remove the need for extensive external semantic features while preserving the current stateof-the-art performance level.

Our contributions in this paper are as follows: We design a neural approach to event linking which in a first step models intra-sentential event mentions via the use of convolutional neural networks for the integration of sentential features.

In the next step, our model learns to make coreference decisions for pairs of event mentions based on the previously generated representations.

This approach does not rely on external semantic features, but rather employs a combination of local and sentential features to describe individual event mentions, and combines these intermediate event representations with standard pairwise features for the coreference decision.

The model achieves state-of-the-art performance in our experiments on two datasets, one of which is publicly available.

Furthermore, we present an analysis of the system errors to identify directions for further research.