The-X: Privacy-Preserving Transformer Inference With Homomorphic Encryption

Abstract

Introduction

Security And Privacy Concern Of Pre-Trained Models

Practical Homomorphic Encryption

The classic definition of homomorphic encryption is a form of encryption that permits users to perform computations on its encrypted data without first decrypting it.

These computations results are retained in an encrypted form, which could be decrypted into identical output produced by the same computations on the unencrypted data.

Let F be a function or the entire pre-trained model, E as an encryption function, D as a decryption function.

Then for any allowed plain text input x, we have:

F (x) = D(g(E(x)),(1)

where g is a constructed function to play the same role of function F , except on encrypted data.

Figure 1 shows how a user performs inference using a cloud-deployed pre-trained model which is not trusted.

First, the pre-trained model receives a ciphertext encrypted by the user private key and performs inference function g on the ciphertext.

Then, the server will send an encrypted result to the user, which can only be decrypted by the user key.

At no point does the cloud service provider gain access to the plain text.

The Intel HE transformer for nGraph (Boemer et al., 2019b,a) is a Homomorphic Encryption backend to the deep learning models.

Currently, it supports the CKKS (Cheon et al., 2017) encryption scheme, implemented by the Simple Encrypted Arithmetic Library (SEAL) (SEAL) from Microsoft Research. It is a research tool to demonstrate the feasibility of HE on deep learning.

Challenges Of Transformer Inference With He

Some HE schemes only support a single algebraic operation, such as addition or multiplication.

These are known as "partially homomorphic" schemes (PHE).

Other schemes, called "fully homomorphic"(FHE), support two such as addition and multiplication.

Note that composing addition and multiplication suffices to construct polynomial functions, and hence polynomial approximations to non-polynomial functions such as GELU (Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2016) or Layer-Norm (Xu et al., 2019b).

Notably, this limitation prevents the exact computation of any comparisonbased operations such as Max, Min, as well as common functions such as exponential or sigmoid.

Finally, "leveled homomorphic" schemes (LHE) support addition and multiplication, only up to a fixed computational depth.

The-X: Formal Description

There are two core ideas in THE-X. The first one is to incorporate the user device into the HE inference, and the second is using "simplified computation" to approximate the non-polynomial functions.

In the following, we will describe how to enable homomorphic encryption of transformer-based models with THE-X.

Approximation Workflow

First, we present the approximation workflow of THE-X, which consists of two stages: Standard Finetuning and LN Distill as depicted in Figure 2.

Given a pre-trained model M and corresponding // replace GELU and Softmax 2 while not done do

3 sample batches (x i , y i ) from D, 4 let (x i , y i ) optimize M with S frozen. end 5 M ← M ⊕ Ñ .

// add the layernorm approximation 6 while not done do 7 sample batches

(x i , y i ) from D, 8 freeze the parameters of M except Ñ . 9 compute k-th layernorm output O k , Õk . 10 compute loss k = MSELoss(O k , Õk ). 11 update Ñ with loss L = k k . end 12 M ← M N . // discard the origin layernorm return M.

downstream data, we aim to produce a fully HE supported M which is fine-tuned and ready for deployment.

The two-stage optimization of algorithm 1 aims to find the best approximation checkpoint.

For computation efficiency, pre-trained models can also be fine-tuned together with the layernorm approximation, and it needs only a single optimization loop.

We will discuss the schedule of the different approximation workflow in Sec 4.6.

There are three major non-polynomial functions in the transformer block, where we will study in detail.

Gaussion Error Linear Units (Gleu)

With a computation of Gaussian error, Gaussian Error Linear Units (GLEUs) (Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2016) is not suitable to serve as an active function in HE state.

The Gaussian kernel includes unsupported functions like exponential.

While in the implementation of the transformer, GELU is defined as a fast approximated version, where the tanh function is still non-polynomial, unsupported by HE.

G(x) = 0.5x(1+tanh[ 2/π(x+0.044715x 3 )]).

(2)  We illustrate the numerical comparison between GELU and RELU in Figure 3 , where the outputs of GELU are very close to RELU.

Hence, we propose to replace the GELU layer in the model with a ReLU activation function.

Despite the M ax function in ReLU, other computations are well supported by HE.

To enable the computation of M ax, we implement the first key idea, incorporating the user device into the inference.

The server will convey ciphertext input to the user for local M ax computation.

Once received the connection, a user device decrypts the ciphertext input and calls the local M ax function to get the results and return re-encrypted results to the server.

Despite the communication cost, no plaintext is leaked during the TLS connection and semantic security is guaranteed.

3 2 1 。 -ReLU -GELU -3 -2 -1 。 1 2 3

Softmax

The second non-polynomial function is softmax, which includes the exponential and division computation.

i ) = exp(x i ) j exp(x j )

.

(3)

The first thought to approximate softmax is to find alternatives of softmax operation in transformer, which include Taylor series approximation (Vincent et al., 2015), softmax-free linear attention (Lu et al., 2021).

However, both of them have some limitations.

The Taylor series approximation can only approximate the exponential operation.

Softmax-free linear attention utilizes newtoninverse to approximate division, but the approximation error is unbounded in full-scale attention settings.

For these considerations, we have no choice but to design an estimation network with addition and multiplication.

i ) = x i * T ( j ReLU (((x j )/2 + 1) 3 )). (4)

Equation 4 is the formal description of our softmax estimation network.

Same as the approximation of GELU, ReLU operation here is realized by communication with the client.

Instead of a division operation, we approximate reciprocal operation with a three-layer linear neural network denoted as T .

To get a better estimation of softmax, we randomly generate input tensors whose values are between [-3, 3] and use their softmax scores as MSE targets.

Then we optimize the T for 100k steps with a learning rate of 1e-3 until the MSE loss drop down to 1e-6.

An under-explored problem here is the Infinite value of Masked Attention, where the input of softmax is always the masked attention scores.

To prevent the attention of masked tokens, the origin transformer model fills the masked attention scores with negative infinity before softmax.

When fed with an infinite value, the softmax estimation model may face numerical disaster.

We will discuss this phenomenon and the corresponding solution in Sec 4.5.

Layernorm

Recall that the layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) in transformer is implemented over a mini-batch of inputs, which could be formulated as:

y = x -E[x] V ar[x] + * γ + β.(5)

The mean and standard deviation are calculated over division operations where the approximation is needed.

γ and β are learnable affine transform parameters.

To avoid the introduction of new parameters, we keep the learnable parameters while leaving the mean and standard deviation achieved by regression.

ŷ = x • γ + β.(6)

The new parameter γ predicts the value of standard deviation by regression from origin γ.

We find the simple linear replacement is enough for values with a small scale of bias.

Here γ, β ∈ R and • denotes the Hadamard product.

The layer normalization will be applied in each multi-head attention block and after the output dense layer.

So the approximation error tends to accumulate when the transformer stacks with too many layers.

We treat the layernorm approximation as an individual stage in Figure 1 as LN-Distill to learn from origin LN layers.

A challenge here is the Attention Overflow, where the input attention score before normalization may have an unbounded scale, leading to numerical problems.

We will discuss the detail of Attention Overflow in Sec 4.5.

Other Practical Replacement

After the approximation workflow, a fine-tuned model consists of only addition and multiplication operations, which is fully compatible with homomorphic encryption.

We power the model by HE transformer backend.

Since the HE transformer backend could only work for TensorFlow checkpoint, any pre-trained transformers inherited from PyTorch building version need to be converted into TensorFlow format first.

There are some other details worth mentioning here.

• For the sof tmax( QK T • We use a fully kernel convolution layer instead of linear projection due to the lack of supported dense operation.

• All matrix multiplication will be converted into the element-wise style.

• We drop the pooler layer for the unsupported operation of tanh.

Privacy-Preserving Inference

In this section, we describe the behavior of HE models during privacy-preserving inference.

Note that inference is completed by the joint effort of the server and the user device.

Algorithm 2: Inference with HE Input: user plain text query P q , private key K generated under server protocol, encrypted server model M. 1 client computes embeddings: E q ← P q .

2 client encrypts query embeddings:

C q ← Encrypt(E q , K).

3 server forwards the model: C i = M(C q ).

4 client handles activation: C a = ReLU (C i ).

5 server continues forwarding: C o = M(C a ).

6 client decrypts results:

P o = Decrypt(C o , K).

In Algorithm 2, notably absent is the support of ReLU operations, where the server exchanges the activation results with the client.

However, all the communication between client and server is in ciphertext, ensuring the privacy of user queries and may prevent eavesdropping attackers from recovering private text data.

Experiments

Evaluation Tasks

Experiment Settings

Approximation Results

Negative Infinity

Recall in Equation 4, we replace softmax with a neural estimation model.

To prevent the attention of masked tokens, the origin transformer model fills the masked attention scores with negative infinity before softmax, where the numerical disaster occurs in our approximation method.

In  attention mask values, the approximation method is extremely sensitive to the numerical changes.

We assume the softmax estimation model fails to deal with large input values and leads to a credible performance drop.

However, when the value of the attention mask becomes too small, it serves as a bias to attention scores, which also leads to a certain performance drop.

We recommend using a moderate mask value between -2 and -5.

Attention Overflow

Another challenge of THE-X is the attention score input of layer normalization.

In most cases, the scale of multi-head attention output is very dense around [-1, 1].

However, before normalization, we also observe the attention scores are scarily sparse, with some extreme values reaching 1e4, which is difficult for our LN-distill stage.

To prevent the overflow attention scores, we use the weight decay of Adam optimizer as regularization.

In Figure 5, we present the attention overflow phenomenon across different tasks.

Without any regularization, our approximation method yields uncontrolled attention scores, leading to poor performance.

As the weight decay increases, the attention scores tend to converge and benefit better approximation results.

We also observe that the larger weight decay may harm the performance on NLI tasks, where the regularization could be seen as trade-off between better approximation results and higher performance upper bound.

For the NER task, larger weight decay may even benefit the performance and also boost our approximation method.

Schedule Of Approximation Workflow

There are still doubts about how to organize the several optimization steps for the best approximation performance.

We investigate four schedule plans:

• Two Stages. Where we freeze the softmax estimation model during standard fine-tuning.

We select the best checkpoint to implement the second stage -distill the layer normalization network.

• Joint FT S. We optimize the softmax estimation model during standard fine-tuning and apply the LN-distillation after.

• Joint FT LN.

We apply one-pass optimization with the softmax estimation model frozen but update the other parameters including layer normalization network.

No further LNdistill will be implemented.

• Joint FT S + LN.

A total one-pass optimization with all approximation parameters updated with the model together.

As illustrated in Figure 6, we observe that finetuning the different approximation components individually (aka. "Two stages") may be a good default to keep the best performance of approximation.

For the regression task STS-B, jointly finetuning the softmax estimation model and approximated layernorm even fails to fulfill the approximation pipeline, pulling the performance down to 0.4%.

We assume fine-tuning different components may fall into a bi-level optimization problem and  it is hard to achieve satisfying results.

In conclusion, the softmax estimation model and the approximated layernorm are both critical components to the performance of THE-X, deserving individual optimization.

Conclusions

Figure 1: An overview of our THE-X. The transformerbased model could inference on encrypted data with our THE-X, enabling theory-guaranteed privacy protection for users.

Approximation Workflow Data: labeled task data D. Input: pre-trained Transformer model M, softmax estimation model S. 1 M ← M (S, ReLU ).

Figure 2: The Approximation Workflow of THE-X. To replace the non-polynomial operations, we split the finetuning stage into several subphases.

Given a pre-trained checkpoint, we drop the pooler of the pre-trained model and replace softmax and GeLU.

Afterward, we follow the standard fine-tuning for classification or regression tasks.

We add LayerNorm approximation into the fine-tuned model and distill knowledge from original LN layers.

After dropping the original LN, we convert the model into fully HE-supported ops with the HE transformer.

Figure 3: The activation results of GELU compared with ReLU.

With an input around zero, the activation results are very close.

With a larger or smaller input value, the activation results tend to converge.

Figure 4, to solve this problem, we give an empirical study of how "negative" the masked attention scores should be.

Despite the indistinguishable F1 score change of raw model fine-tune with different

Figure4: Performance on CONLL2003 task with different mask values.

We find the "Negative Infinity" value of the 0 mask greatly reduces approximation performance.

In THE-X using a mask value in[-3, -5] might be a default choice.

Figure 5: Performance on all tasks with different weight decay values, measured on the development sets.

Metrics are marked on the y-axis and weight decay values are marked on the x-axis.

Figure 6: Performance on all tasks with different organizations of approximation workflow.

Jointly finetuning the softmax estimation model or approximated layernorm leads to a performance drop across all tasks.

Performance on the GLUE 1 tasks for both baseline (standard finetuning) and THE-X with BERT-tiny, measured on the development sets.

We report the best results by hyper-parameter search.

|D| denotes the number of training examples.

THE-X only suffers average utility performance loss: < 1.5% in most tasks.

'P/S corr.' is Pearson/Spearman correlation and 'm/mm' denotes the accuracy scores on matched/mismatched set.

Performance on the CONLL2003 task for both baseline and THE-X with BERT-tiny, measured on the development sets.

We find that the replacement with ReLU has a slight effect on performance and even gets a better F1 score by 0.12 than original GELU activation.