A Corpus Of Annotated Revisions For Studying Argumentative Writing

Abstract

Introduction

Corpus Design Decisions

Consider this scenario: Alice begins her social science argumentative essay with the sentence "Electronic communication allows people to make connections beyond physical limits."

An analytical system might (rightly) identify the sentence as the thesis of her essay, and an evaluative system might give the essay a low score due to this sentence's vagueness and a later lack of evidence (though Alice may not know why she received that score).

Now suppose in a revised draft, Alice expanded the sentence: "Electronic communication allows people to make connections beyond physical limits location and enriches connections that would have been impossible to make otherwise."

An analytical system would still identify the sentence as the thesis, and an evaluative system might raise the overall score a little higher.

Alice may become satisfied with the increase and move on.

However, there is an opportunity lost -neither the analytical nor the evaluative system addressed the quality of her revision.

A revision analysis system might be helpful for Alice because it would link "limits" to "location and ..." and identify the reason why she made the change -perhaps adding precision.

If Alice had intended her change as a way to add evidential support for her thesis, she would see that her attempt was not as successful as she hoped.

The above scenario highlights the application of a revision analysis system.

This paper is about creating a corpus to enable the development of such systems.

Because this is a relatively new problem, there are many possible ways for us to design the corpus.

Here we discuss some of our decisions.

First, we need to define the unit of revision.

The example above illustrates a phrase-aligned revision.

While this offers a fairly precise definition of the scope of a revision, it may be difficult to achieve consistent annotations.

For example, the changes may not adhere to any syntactic linguistic unit.

For this first corpus, we define our unit of revision to be at the sentence level.

In other words, even if a pair of sentences contains multiple edits, the entire sentence pair will be annotated as one sentence revision.

Second, we need to define the quality we want to observe about the revision sentence pair.

For this first corpus, we focus on recognizing the purpose of the revision, as in the example above.

It is a useful property, and it has previously been studied by others in the literature.

People have considered both binary purpose categories such as Content vs. Surface (Faigley and Witte, 1981) or Factual vs. Fluency (Bronner and Monz, 2012) as well as more fine-grained categories (Pfeil et al., 2006;Jones, 2008;Liu and Ram, 2009;Daxenberger and Gurevych, 2012;Zhang and Litman, 2015).

Our corpus follows the two-tiered schema used by (Zhang and Litman, 2015) (see Section 3.2).

Third, we not only have to decide on the annotation format, we also need to decide how to obtain Write Draft1 @home

Revise Draft1 @home

Revise Draft2 @lab

Revisions I (Rev12)

Revisions II (Rev23)

Figure 1: Our collected corpus contains five components: three drafts of an essay and two annotated revisions between drafts.

the raw text: argumentative essays with multiple drafts.

We decided to sample from a population of predominantly college students, inclusive of both native and proficient non-native (aka L2) speakers.

Comparing to high school students, college students are expected to produce essays having a better organization of the argument elements.

Including native and L2 speakers allows for the exploration of possible rewriting differences between writers of varying backgrounds.

We decided to give all subjects the same writing prompt and collect three drafts.

The identical prompt minimizes the impact of topic difference for argumentationrelated study.

The collection of three drafts allows for a comparison of revision differences at different stages of rewriting.

Finally, we need a method for eliciting two revised drafts from each writer.

Ideally, an instructor would give formative feedback after each draft for each student, but we do not have the resources to carry out such an expensive project.

We simulate instructor feedback by asking students to add more examples after the first draft.

To elicit a second revised draft, we use two different systems.

First, we utilize an idealized2 version of the ArgRewrite revision analysis system (Zhang et al., 2016).

Ar-gRewrite highlights the locations of revisions at the sentence level and colors the revisions differently according to the revision purpose types.

Our second system shows a character-based comparison between subsequent essay drafts3 .

This system is designed to have a similar look as Ar-gRewrite by highlighting the location of revisions.

However, the type of revisions are not provided.

The Argrewrite Corpus

Based on the above design decisions, we have developed a corpus of argumentative essays with three drafts and detailed annotations for sentencealigned revisions between each consecutive pair of drafts.

The main corpus has five elements, with the relationships between them shown in Figure 1; Section 3.1 describes the procedure for obtaining them.

Section 3.2 briefly describes the revision schema we used and reports the inter-annotator agreement.

Additionally, we have collected metadata from the participants who contributed to the corpus (discussed in Section 3.3); these data may be useful for user behavior analysis.

Corpus Development Procedure

We have recruited 60 participants aged 18 years and older, among whom 40 were English native speakers and 20 were non-native speakers with sufficient English proficiency.

4 The study to collect the corpus is carried out in three 40-60 minute sessions over the duration of two weeks.

Draft1 Each participant begins by completing a pre-study questionnaire (Section 3.3) and writing a short essay online.

Participants are instructed to keep the essay around 400 words, making a single main point with two supporting examples.

They are given the following prompt:

"Suppose you've been asked to contribute a short op-ed piece for The New York Times.

Argue whether the proliferation of electronic 4 i.e., with a TOEFL score higher than 100.

communications (e.g., email, text or other social media) enriches or hinders the development of interpersonal relationships."

Draft2 A few days later, participants are asked to revise their first draft online based on the following feedback: Strengthen the essay by adding one more example or reasoning for the claim; then add a rebuttal to an opposing idea; keep the essay at 400 words.

With this feedback we try to push participants to make revisions for later processing by the two interfaces used to create Draft3.

Annotated Revisions I (Rev12) The two drafts are semi-manually aligned at the sentence level.

5Then, the purpose of each pair of sentence revision is manually coded by a trained annotator, following the annotation guideline (see Section 3.2).

Draft3 Participants write their third draft in a lab environment.

This time, they are not given additional instructional feedback.

Instead, participants are shown a computer interface that highlights the differences between their first and second drafts.

They are asked to revise and create a third draft to improve the general quality of their essay.

We experimented with two variations of revision elicitation.

Chosen at random, half of the participants (10 L2 participants and 20 Native participants) are shown Interface A, the interface based on the Ar-gRewrite system (Zhang et al., 2016), which highlights the annotated differences between the drafts (Figure 2 This world has no restriction on who one can talk to.

This world has no restrictions on whom one can talk to.

This world has no restrictions on whom one can talk to.

Unfortunately, the younger users of digital communication cannot be entirely protected from the rhetoric of any outsider.

Warrant/ Reasoning/ Backing Modern society is now faced with the issue of cyber bullying as a result.

The only aspects of communication that this new development improves are internet navigation and faux internet relatability.

The only aspects of digital communication that this new development improves are internet navigation and faux internet relatability.

The only aspects of digital communication that this new development improves are internet navigation and faux internet relationships.

Being immersed in the sphere of new technologies can allow for complete isolation from the active, non-digital world.

Being immersed in the sphere of new technologies can allow for complete isolation from the active, non-digital world.

Table 1: Examples from the annotated corpus.

The sentences were aligned across the drafts and the revision purposes were labeled on the aligned sentence pairs.

From Draft1 to Draft2, there are two Modify revisions (Spelling and Clarity) and one Add revision.

From Draft2 to Draft3, there are two Add revisions (Rebuttal and Reasoning) and one Modify revision (Clarity).

terface B, a streamlined character-based diff (Figure 2(b)).

In Interface A, some purposes were renamed from the original annotation categories to help the participants better understand the system (as detailed in Table 2) 6 .

Both interface groups are asked to read a tutorial about their respective interfaces before beginning to revise.

Participants in group A are also asked to verify the manually annotated revision purposes between their first and second drafts.

This information is collected to investigate the impact of the difference between the system's recognized and the participant's intended purpose.

After completing the final revision, all participants are given a post-study survey about their experiences (Section 3.3).

Additionally, participants in group A are asked to verify the automatically predicted revision purposes between their second and third drafts (Section 4.2).

Annotated Revisions II (Rev23) Regardless of which interface the participants used, the second and third draft are compared and annotated by the trained annotator in the same process as before.

6 Figure 2(a) has two additional categories.

Precision was intended to represent revisions that make a sentence more precise.

Unknown was intended to represent revisions that cannot be categorized to existing categories.

These two categories were not used during annotation as they were reported to be confusing in our pilot studies.

Revision Annotation Guidelines

Following our prior corpus annotations (Zhang and Litman, 2015), sentence revisions are first coarsely categorized as Surface or Content changes (Faigley and Witte, 1981), depending on whether any informational content was modified; within each coarse category, we distinguish between several finer categories based on the argumentative and discourse writing literature (Kneupper, 1978;Faigley and Witte, 1981;Burstein et al., 2003).

Our adapted schema has three Surface categories (Organization, Word Usage/Clarity, and Conventions/Grammar/Spelling) and five Content categories (Claim/Ideas, Warrant/Reasoning/Backing, Rebuttal/Reservation, Evidence, and General Content Development).

Table 1 shows example aligned sentences in three collected drafts and their annotated revision categories.

The edit types of revisions (Add, Delete and Modify) are decided according to the alignment of sentences.

Two annotators (one is experienced, and the other is newly trained) participated in data annotation.

The annotators first went through a "training" phase where both annotators annotated 5 files and discussed their disagreements to resolve misunderstandings.

Then, both annotators separately annotated 10 new files and Kappa was calculated  on the annotation of these 10 new files.

The Kappa on this held-out data is 0.84 on the two coarse categories of Surface vs. Content and 0.71 on the eight fine-grained categories that appear in Table 2.

The disagreements between annotators were removed after discussion and the final labels were used as the gold standard annotation.

Meta-Data

In addition to the raw text and annotations, the corpus release includes participant meta-data from both a pre-study and a post-study survey.

The pre-study survey asks for participants' demographic information as well as their self-reported writing background, such as participants' confidence in their writing ability, the number of drafts they typically make, etc.

The questions are listed in Appendix A.

Post-Study Survey The post-study survey contains questions about the participants' in-lab revision experience, such as whether they found the computer interface helpful.

All questions are answered on a scale of 1 to 5, ranging from "strongly disagree" to "strongly agree".

Details of questions are shown in Appendix B.

Descriptive Statistics

Table 3 indicates the average number of words/sentences/paragraphs per essay draft.

The corpus includes 180 essays: 120 (Draft1 and Draft2) with an average of about 400 words and 60 (Draft3) with an average of around 500 words.

Among the 40 native speakers, there were 29 (72.5%) undergraduates, 6 (15%) graduate students, and 5 (12.5%) non-students (post-docs and lecturers).

Among the 20 L2 speakers, there were 4 (20%) undergraduates, and 16 (80%) graduate students; there were 9 Chinese, 2 Bengali, 2 Marathi, 2 Persian, 1 Arabic, 1 Korean, 1 Portuguese, 1 Spanish, and 1 Tamil.

In terms of discipline, 33 participants (55%) were from the natural sciences, 24 (40%) from the social sciences, and 2 (3.3%) from the humanities.

1 participant (1.7%) did not reveal his/her discipline.

Public Release

The corpus is freely available for research usage7 .

The first release includes the raw text plus the revision annotations and the meta-data.

The revision annotations are stored as .xlsx files.

There are 60 spreadsheet files for revisions from Draft1 to Draft2 and 60 more spreadsheet files for revisions from Draft2 to Draft3.

Each spreadsheet file contains two sheets: Old Draft and New Draft.

Each row in the sheet represents one sentence in the corresponding draft.

The index of the aligned sentence row in the other draft and the type of the revision on the sentence are recorded.

The metadata are in .log text files.

Information in the text files are stored using the JSON data format.

Example Uses Of The Corpus

While the development of a full fledged revision analysis system is outside the scope of this work, we demonstrate potential uses of our corpus with two examples.

We first perform statistical analyses on the collected revision data and meta-data to understand aspects of participant behavior.

We also use the corpus to train a supervised classifier to automatically predict revision purposes.

Student Revision Behavior Analysis

Hypotheses

Using the ArgRewrite Corpus, we can begin to ask and address some questions about revision habits and behaviors.

Our first question is: How do different types of revision feedback impact student revision? And relatedly: Does student background (e.g., native vs. L2) make a difference?

We thus mine the corpus to test the following hypotheses: H1.

There is a difference in participants' revising behaviors depending on which interface is used to elicit the third draft.

H2.

For participants who used Interface A, if the recognized revision purpose differs from the participants' intended revision purpose, participants will further modify their revision.

H3.

L2 and native speakers have different behaviors in making revisions.

H1 and H2 address the first question; H3 addresses the second.

Methodology

Results And Discussion

Automatic Revision Identification

Another use of the corpus is to serve as a gold standard for training and testing a revision purpose prediction component for use in an automatic revision analysis system.

In the version of ArgRewrite evaluated earlier (Interface A), the manual annotation of revision purposes enabled the system to provide revision feedback to users, which motivated them to improve their writing (H2).

Automatic argumentative revision purpose prediction has been previously investigated by Zhang and Litman (2015).

They developed and reported the performance of a binary classifier for each individual revision category (1 for revisions of the category and 0 for the rest of all revisions) using features from prior research.

The availability of our corpus makes it possible for researchers to replicate such methods and conduct further studies.

Hypotheses

In this paper, we repeat the experiment of Zhang and Litman (2015) under different settings to investigate three new hypotheses that can now be investigated given the features of our corpus:

H4.

The method used in Zhang and Litman (2015) for high school writings is also useful for the writings of college students.

H5.

The same revision classification method works differently for first revision attempts and second revision attempts.

H6.

The revision classification model trained on L2 essays has a different preference from the model trained on native essays.

Methodology

Results And Discussion

Conclusion And Future Work

Figure 2: Screenshot of the interfaces. (a) Interface A with the annotated revision purposes, (b) Interface B with a streamlined character-based diff.

(a)); half of the participants are shown In-

Definition of category names in Interface A.

Descriptive statistics of the ArgRewrite Corpus, including average number of words, sentences and paragraphs per essay draft.

Number of revisions, by fine-grain revision purposes and edit types (add, delete, modify).

Illustration of features used in the revision classification study.

Average unweighted F-score for each binary classification task.

The first 6 rows show the average value of 10-fold cross-validation. * indicates significantly better than unigram baseline (p < .05).

The last 2 rows show the F-value for training on L2/Native data and testing on Native data.

Bold indicates larger than the number in the other row.

Chenhao Tan and Lillian Lee. 2014.

A corpus of sentence-level revisions in academic writing: A step towards understanding statement strength in communication.

In Proceedings of ACL (short paper).

Huichao Xue and Rebecca Hwa. 2014.

Improved correction detection in revised ESL sentences.

In ACL (2).

pages 599-604.

Helen Yannakoudakis, Ted Briscoe, and Ben Medlock. 2011.

A new dataset and method for automatically grading ESOL texts.

In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies-Volume 1.

pages 180-189. Fan Zhang, Rebecca Hwa, Diane Litman, and Homa B Hashemi. 2016.

Argrewrite: A web-based revision assistant for argumentative writings.

NAACL HLT 2016 page 37.

Fan Zhang and Diane Litman. 2014.

Sentence-level rewriting detection.

In Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications.

pages 149-154. Fan Zhang and Diane Litman. 2015.

Annotation and classification of argumentative writing revisions.

In Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications.

pages 133-143.

Please tell us how comfortable you feel about writing in the English language versus writing in your primary language. (Not at all comfortable, Not very comfortable, Somewhat comfortable, comfortable, Extremely comfortable) 9.

What are some of your recent classes that have an intensive writing component to them? How did you do in these classes? 10.

What aspects of writing do you think you are good at? e.g. vocabulary choice, clear sentences, writing organization.

11. What aspects of writing do you think you can improve?