In this paper, we have presented a novel MM-Claims dataset to foster research on multimodal claim analysis.

The dataset has been curated from Twitter data and contains more than 3000 manually annotated tweets for three tasks related to claim detection across three topics, COVID-19, Climate Change, and Technology.

We have evaluated several baseline approaches and compared them against two state-of-the-art fake news detection approaches.

Our experimental results suggest that the fine-tuning of pre-trained multimodal and unimodal architectures such as ALBEF and BERT yield the best performance.

We also observed that the overlaid text in images is important in information dissemination, particularly for claim detection.

To this end, we evaluated a couple of strategies to incorporate OCR text into our models, which yielded a much better trade-off between identifying visuallyrelevant and visually-irrelevant (text-only) claims.

In the future, we will explore other and novel architectures for multimodal representation learning and other information extraction techniques to incorporate individual modalities better.

We also plan to investigate fine-grained overlaps of concepts and meaning in image and text, and expand the dataset to COVID-19 related sub-topics and specific climate change events.

In the following we include additional hyperparameter (A.1) details and experimental results (A.2), additional dataset and annotation process details (A.3), and some annotated tweets for multimodal claim detection (A.4).

For fine-tuning BERT and ALBEF, we use a batch size of 16 and 8 (size constraints), respectively.

We train the models for five epochs and use the best performing model (in terms of accuracy on the validation set) for evaluation.

For BERT, a dropout with the ratio of 0.2 is applied before the classification head.

Further, we use AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) as the optimizer with a learning rate of 3e -5 and a linear warmup schedule.

The learning rate is first linearly increased from 0 to 3e -5 for iterations in the first epoch and then linearly decreased to 0 for the rest of the iterations in 4 epochs.

For ALBEF, we use the recommended fine-tuning hyper-parameters and settings from the publicly available code.

We experiment with CLIP's three variants that use different visual encoder backbones, ResNet-50 (RN50), ResNet-50x4 (RN504) and a vision transformer (ViT-B/16) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) with BERT as textual encoder backbone.

We select the models for textual and multimodal SVM experiments based on the performance (higher accuracy) using features from the visual encoders.

Table 5 shows different visual encoders' features (with SVM) performance on binary and tertiary claim detection.

It should be noted that just like ALBEF, CLIP models can be fine-tuned with image-text tweet pairs for binary and tertiary tasks.

However, when we experimented with fine-tuning the last few layers of CLIP with a classification head on top, it always performed worse than using extracted features for classification with SVM.

This phenomenon is probably because of our relatively smaller sized labeled dataset, which is not enough for fine-tuning CLIP for the task.

A.2.2 Results for "without conflicts" (E) Evaluation Split

In Section 4, we show results for tertiary claim detection (TCD) on evaluation splits "with resolved conflicts" (E C ) by training on T and T C .

Here in Table 6, we show the evaluation on "without conflicts" evaluation split (E).

As with evaluation on E C , multimodal models are more sensitive to training on T C where conflict resolution strategy causes the accuracy to drop for all models.

However, CLIP and ALBEF models, in this case, have higher F1-score (as well as accuracy) when trained on T .

Even with less training data, the models perform better and best among all evaluated multimodal models.

In the case of training on T C , BERT performs the best, which is closely followed by ALBEF with OCR text.

As described in section 4.3.1, the evaluation of retrieved visually-relevant and visually-irrelevant claims on E follows the evaluation on E C .

Even though CLIP I and fine-tuned BERT retrieves the most amount of two types of claims, all models do better when trained on T C than on T .

Overall, for a realistic scenario, training on T C gives the best performance trade-off between Acc, F1 and retrieved claims for multimodal models.

Following the results on E C in section 4 for binary and tertiary tasks, we show normalized (by row) confusion matrices based on predictions from the ALBEF ⊕ OCR ⊕ F T model.

Figure 3a is the confusion matrix on E C for binary claim detection (BCD).

Whereas, Figure 3b shows the matrices on E C with training on T C (b.1) and T (b.2).

Although the not-claim's true positives remain the same, confusion for the not-check-worthy and check-worthy class is less severe when trained on T C .

Additional results on evaluation split without conflicts (E).

The underlying models are trained for binary claim detection (BCD).

The labels for visual relevance are only used for retrieval evaluation.

The amount of text that can be detected from an image varies, as it can be seen in Figure 8.

As a consequence, we experimented with the length of OCR text in terms of the number of words for both binary and tertiary claim detection with ALBEF.

We observe (see Figure 5) that 128 words give 0.83 0.17  The following Table 9 shows split-wise distribution of topics and labels in data.

Numbers in red and black are for "with resolved conflicts" and "without conflicts" splits, respectively.

Although we crawl tweets from topic-based corpora, we further filter tweets by manually marking top 300 hashtags (sorted by occurrence) relevant to the topic.

Figure 7 shows top-20 relevant hashtags for each topic.

Figure 7d shows the annotation screen with the image-text pair, claim questions and a text box for feedback on difficult and missing image tweets.

We included multiple annotated samples corresponding to visually-relevant claim (see Figure 8) and not a claim (see Figure 9) classes.