In this study we examined patterns of correlation-to-causation exaggeration in press releases.

We developed a new corpus with 16,431 pairs of observational study papers and associated press releases, and a prediction model for identifying cases of correlation-to-causation exaggeration in press releases.

Applying the prediction model to the new corpus, we found that among all observational study papers that made correlational claims only, 22% of the associated press releases made exaggerated causal claims.

Furthermore, universities made more exaggerated claims than journal publishers by a 1.5 to 1 ratio.

The good news is the exaggeration rate has slightly decreased in the past ten years, despite the increase in the total number of press releases.

More research is needed to understand the cause of the decreasing pattern.

This study has a few limitations which we plan to improve in future work: First, the current exaggeration detection method relies on the structured abstract of a research paper to identify its main claims from the conclusion subsection.

This restriction limits our data set size since only about one third of papers have a structured abstract.

In future work we will design an algorithm that can automatically identify the conclusion sentences from unstructured abstracts.

Second, the current approach uses the doi links provided by EurekAlert! and ScienceDaily to link research papers and press releases; however, these manually-added links cover less than 50% of EurekAlert!

press releases.

In future work we would like to develop a content-based matching system to link press releases to scientific literature.

Third, the current approach matches the main claims in research papers and press releases at article level, by utilizing the inverted-pyramid structure in press release.

This approach works well for press releases, but might not be suitable for identifying exaggeration in other genres.

For example, inverted-pyramid structure is not common in online discussion forums (e.g. Reddit (Zhou and Yu, 2020)) and social media posts.

Some news articles may also cite findings from multiple scientific studies.

In future work we would like to develop a sentence-level approach for pairing claims in research papers and their paraphrased versions in news and social media.