We define open cloze generation as the task of predicting a set of tokens that should be gapped in the text.

Unlike previous approaches that work at the sentence level, our models work at the paragraph level (i.e. take the full text as input), since we believe the interactions between gaps can only be optimally captured when the text is processed as a whole rather than sentence by sentence.

Given a text passage, we aim to predict the words that should be gapped in order to create a cloze test that would reliably assess student ability.

The task is modelled as a supervised sequence tagging problem where each token is classified as being a good potential gap or not.

We employ ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), one of the state-of-the-art pre-trained transformer-based language representation models (Wolf et al., 2020).

ELECTRA is an extension of BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) with a different pretraining task which is a discriminator (rather than a generator) and aims to detect replaced tokens (rather than generating words for the masks).

We believe that this discrimination objective makes it more suitable for our token classification task.

Moreover, we also exploit ELECTRA's generation capabilities as a language model for estimating the answers to the proposed gaps as an auxiliary task.

Hence, to make the most of this pre-trained model, we fine-tune it using two training objectives, as depicted in Figure 2: 1 A token classification objective which aims to minimise the error of classifying each token as a potential gap or not. 2 A language modelling objective that aims to minimise the negative log-likelihood of regenerating the words that have been gapped.

The first objective is typical of any standard token classification model and constitutes our key task.

In particular, we use ELECTRA's discriminator head with softmax to tag each word in the input sequence as a 'good' gap or not.

All the gaps in our training data are replaced with the first intended target answer and labelled positive, while the remaining tokens are labelled negative ( A ).

The second and auxiliary objective attempts to model our preference for gaps with a restricted number of answers while also ensuring that the original word can be guessed from the context.

This is to avoid generating gaps that are too 'open' and therefore ineffective, such as a gap that accepts any noun or adjective.

Specifically, we mask the words in the positions that are predicted as gaps by the discriminator and use ELECTRA's generative head to generate the expected words in the blanks ( B ).

While the input layers are shared between the discriminator and the generator model, the two branches of the system leading to the two objectives are fine-tuned in parallel in a multi-task setting.