Low-resource NLP Previous work in low-resource NLP tasks includes feature-engineering (Tan and Zhang, 2008) which requires a recurring effort when adapting to a new data set.

Another approach is to transfer knowledge across domains to increase the amount of data that is available for training (Zoph et al., 2016;Nguyen and Chiang, 2017;Kocmi and Bojar, 2018;Yang et al., 2017;Gupta et al., 2018).

One of these approaches relied on adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014) to learn a domain adaptive classifier (Ganin et al., 2016) in another domain or language where training data was plentiful while ensuring that the model generalizes to the low-resource domain (Chen et al., 2018).

However, these approaches have not used a pre-trained generic language model, but perform pre-training for each task individually.

Adapting pre-trained models The effectiveness of transfer learning in low-resource settings was previously demonstrated for machine translation (Zoph et al., 2016;Nguyen and Chiang, 2017;Kocmi and Bojar, 2018), sequence tagging (Yang et al., 2017) and sentiment classification (Gupta et al., 2018 close to target corpus.

Some previous work has analyzed the performance behavior of the BERT model in different scenarios.

Hao et al. (2019) showed that a classifier that fine-tunes a pre-trained BERT model generally has wider optima on the training loss curves in comparison to models trained for the same task from scratch, indicating a more general classifier (Chaudhari et al., 2017;Li et al., 2018;Izmailov et al., 2018).

Peters et al. (2019) examine the adaption phase of LM based classifiers by comparing fine-tuning and feature extraction where the LMs parameters are fixed.

In contrast, we focus on the low-resource setting where less than 1,000 data points are available for fine-tuning.

Layer freezing in deep Transformers Experiments by Yosinski et al. (2014) indicated that the first layers of a LM capture a more general language understanding, while later layers capture more taskspecific knowledge.

With this motivation, Howard and Ruder (2018) introduced gradual unfreezing of the Transformer layers during each epoch, beginning with the last layer.

Hao et al. (2019) analyzed the loss surfaces in dependency of the model parameters before and after training and came to the same conclusion that lower layers contain more transferable features.

However, none of the work has considered the training set size as a dependent parameter as our experiments presented in this paper.

Active learning in NLP There is some prior work regarding active learning for NLP tasks using deep neural networks.

Zhang et al. (2017) explored pool-based active learning for text classification using a model similar to our setting.

However, they used word-level embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) and focus on representation learning, querying pool points that are expected to maximize the gradient changes in the embedding layer.

Shen et al. (2017) used active learning for named entity recognition tasks.

They proposed a acquisition strategy named Maximum Normalized Log-Probability which is a normalized form of the Constrained Forward-Backward confidence estimation (Culotta and McCallum, 2004;Culotta and McCallum, 2005).

Using this strategy, they achieved on-par performance in comparison to a model using the BALD acquisition function and MC Dropout without needing multiple forward passes.

However, this approach is not suitable for any arbitrary model architecture but requires conditional random fields (CRFs) for the approximation of model uncertainty.