Named Entity Recognition (NER) is the task of identifying and typing phrases that contain the names of persons, organizations, locations, and so on.

It is an information extraction task that is im-portant for understanding large bodies of text and is considered an essential pre-processing stage in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Information Retrieval systems.

NER is successful for languages which have a large amount of annotated data, but for languages with little to no annotated data, this task becomes very challenging.

There are two common approaches to address the lack of training data problem.

The first approach is to automatically generate annotated training data in the target language from Wikipedia articles or from parallel corpora.

The performance of this method depends on the quality of the generated data and how well the language-specific features are explored.

The second approach is to train a model on another language which has abundant training data, and then apply the model directly on test documents in the target language.

This direct transfer technique relies on developing language-independent features.

Note that these two approaches are orthogonal and can be used together.

In this paper, we focus on the second, direct transfer setting.

We propose a cross-lingual NER model which is trained on annotated documents in one or multiple source languages, and can be applied to all languages in Wikipedia.

The model depends on a cross-lingual wikifier, which only requires multilingual Wikipedia, no sentencealigned or word-aligned parallel text is needed.

The key contribution of this paper is the development of a method that makes use of crosslingual wikification and entity linking (Tsai and Roth, 2016;Ji et al., 2015;Ji et al., 2016;Moro et al., 2014) to generate language-independent features for NER, and showing how useful this can be for training NER models with no annotation in the target language.

Given a mention (sub-string) from a document written in a foreign language, the goal of cross-lingual wikification is to find the cor- Figure 1: An example of a German sentence.

We ground each word to the English Wikipedia using a cross-lingual wikifier.

A word is not linked if it is a stop word or the wikifier returns NIL.

We can see that the FreeBase types are strong signals to NER even with imperfect disambiguation.

responding title in the English Wikipedia.

Traditionally, wikification has been considered a downstream task of NER.

That is, a named entity recognizer is first applied to identify mentions of interest, and then a wikifier is used to ground the extracted mentions to Wikipedia entries.

In contrast to this traditional pipeline, we show that the ability to ground and disambiguate words is very useful to NER.

By grounding every n-gram to the English Wikipedia, we obtain useful clues to NER, regardless of the target language.

Figure 1 shows an example of a German sentence.

We use a cross-lingual wikifier to ground each word to the English Wikipedia.

We can see that even though the disambiguation is not perfect, the FreeBase types still provide valuable information.

That is, although "Albrecht Lehmann" is not an entry in Wikipedia, the wikifier still links "Albrecht" and "Lehmann" to people.

Since words in any language are grounded to the English Wikipedia, the corresponding Wikipedia categories and Freebase types can be used as language-independent features.

The proposed model significantly outperforms comparable direct transfer methods on the Spanish, Dutch, and German CoNLL data.

We also evaluate the model on five low-resource languages: Turkish, Tagalog, Yoruba, Bengali, and Tamil.

Due to small sizes of Wikipedia, the overall performance is not as good as the CoNLL experiments.

Nevertheless, the wikifier features still give significant improvements, and the proposed direct transfer model outperforms the state of the art, which assumes parallel text and some interaction with a native speaker of the target language.

In addition, we show that the proposed languageindependent features not only perform well on the direct transfer scenario, but also improve monolingual models, which are trained on the target language.

Another advantage of the proposed direct transfer model is that we can train on documents from multiple languages together, and further im-prove the results.